29/11/2022, 22:44 Battle of Hastings | Summary, Facts, & Significance | Britannica

 https:/Avww.britannica.com/event/Battle-of-Hastings 1/9
29/11/2022, 22:44 Battle of Hastings | Summary, Facts, & Significance | Britannica

Location: Battle « Hastings *« United Kingdom « England
Participants: Normandy » England

Context: Norman Conquest

Key People: William FitzOsbern, 1st earl of Hereford » Harald Ill Sigurdsson + Harold II » Tostig, earl of
Northumbria » William |

See all related content —

Top Questions

 

 

Why was the Battle of Hastings fought? v

Who was the Battle of Hastings between? v

How was the Battle of Hastings fought? Vv

How did the Battle of Hastings change the course of English history? v
Summary

Read a brief summary of this topic v

Battle of Hastings, battle on October 14, 1066, that ended in the defeat of Harold

II of England by William, duke of Normandy, and established the Normans as the
rulers of England.

FS sieiael
Q yaoc coe

 

https:/Avww.britannica.com/event/Battle-of-Hastings 2/9
29/11/2022, 22:44 Battle of Hastings | Summary, Facts, & Significance | Britannica

Part: A

    

Godwine, the earl of Wessex and the most powerful man in England, Edward

probably designated William, a cousin, as his heir. Upon Godwine’s death in 1053,
his son Harold became earl of Wessex, and Harold spent the next decade
consolidating his power and winning favour among the nobles and clergy. According
to Norman accounts, among them the Bayeux Tapestry, Harold subsequently swore
an oath of fealty to William and promised to uphold William’s claim to the English
throne. Nevertheless, on his deathbed (January 5, 1066) Edward granted the

the next day.

 

BRITANNICA QUIZ
A History of War

You may have heard of D-Day, the Battle of Hastings, and Waterloo, but do you know their
historical significance? Embark upon a historical journey of warfare in this quiz.

 

You have reached Britannica's public website.

Click here for ad-free access to your Britannica School or Library
account.

https:/Avww.britannica.com/event/Battle-of-Hastings 3/9
29/11/2022, 22:44 Battle of Hastings | Summary, Facts, & Significance | Britannica

   

Harold Il; William |

By this time, however, William controlled, directly or by alliance, every harbour from
the Schelde to Brest. His father-in-law, Baldwin V of Flanders, was regent of France,
and Geoffrey III, the count of Anjou and his only dangerous neighbour, was
distracted by rebellion. With a solemn blessing from Pope Alexander II and the
emperor's approval, William prepared to enforce his claim to the English crown. He
persuaded the Norman barons to promise support and recruited thousands of
volunteers from Brittany, Maine, France, Flanders, Spain, and Italy. The
organization of supplies and transport for this miscellaneous host and the imposition military achievements.

Harold mobilized his fleet and army in May, repelled his outlawed brother Tostig’s
raids on the south and east coasts, and concentrated his large fleet off Spithead and
his militia along the Hampshire, Sussex, and Kentish coasts. Ready to move early in
August, William’s transports were kept in port by north winds for eight weeks, first
in the Dives estuary until September 12, then at Saint-Valery-sur-Somme.
Meanwhile, the English militia, short of supplies after four months’ fruitless waiting,
lost morale and were dismissed on September 8. Harold’s ships were brought back to
the Thames, with many being lost en route. The English Channel was thus left open,
and the best chance of destroying William’s army was lost. About that time Harald
himself with Tostig and entered the Humber with 300 ships. There he defeated the
forces of Edwin, earl of Mercia, and his brother Morcar, earl of Northumbria, in a
heavy battle at Gate Fulford, outside York (September 20). This battle not only
crippled Harald’s forces, but also left the two earls incapable of raising another army

his



https:/Avww.britannica.com/event/Battle-of-Hastings 4/9
29/11/2022, 22:44 Battle of Hastings | Summary, Facts, & Significance | Britannica

On September 27 the wind changed, and William crossed to England unopposed,
with an army of 4,000 to 7,000 cavalry and infantry, disembarking at Pevensey in
his position, and began to explore and ravage the area, determined not to lose touch
with his ships until he had defeated Harold’s main army. Harold, at York, learned of
William’s landing on or about October 2 and hurried southward, gathering
reinforcements as he went. By October 13 Harold was approaching Hastings with
about 7,000 men, many of whom were half-armed, untrained peasants. He had
mobilized barely half of England’s trained soldiers, yet he advanced against William
instead of making William come to meet him in a chosen defensive position. The
bold yet ultimately unsuccessful strategy is probably explained by Harold’s eagerness
to defend his own men and lands, which William was harrying, and to thrust the

Normans back into the sea.

 

 

William, warned of Harold’s approach, determined to force battle immediately. At
dawn on October 14 William moved toward Harold’s army, which was occupying a
ttack—

Ss

https:/Avww.britannica.com/event/Battle-of-Hastings 5/9
29/11/2022, 22:44 Battle of Hastings | Summary, Facts, & Significance | Britannica

wholly favourable; William’s advance was unexpected, and Harold had to fight where
he stood or retreat. He placed himself, his housecarls, and his other trained troops
around his standard at the summit of the ridge (where the high altar of Battle Abbey
was later placed), grouping his other troops along the crest for about 400 yards (365
metres) westward and about 200 yards (about 180 metres) eastward, at which points
the slope became steep enough to protect both flanks. The front was too small: some

men, finding no fighting room, withdrew; the rest, in too close order, made a perfect

target for arrows.

 

Battle of Hastings

The easy slope allowed William’s knights an open approach, against which Harold
relied on the close “shield wall” formation of his trained troops to hurl back and
dishearten the enemy. The heavily armoured knight, riding a powerful charger and

holding couched a heavy thrusting lance, was still 100 years away. Norman armour and swords, had to engage the English infantry hand-to-hand. Harold’s hopes
ig and

https:/Avww.britannica.com/event/Battle-of-Hastings 6/9
29/11/2022, 22:44 Battle of Hastings | Summary, Facts, & Significance | Britannica

oe ee ET =

        

 

Hastings, Battle of

William’s archers opened at close range, inflicting many casualties but suffering
heavily from the English slings and spears. William therefore threw in his cavalry,
which was so badly mauled by English infantry wielding two-handed baitle-axes that
it panicked and fled. William himself checked and turned them, counterattacking a
large body of Englishmen who had broken ranks in pursuit. William pressed his
cavalry charges throughout the day, interspersing them with flights of arrows, and
positions by feigning retreat twice. The defense, hard-pressed, depleted, and tiring,
was worn down and slowly outnumbered. Harold’s brothers, Gyrth and Leofwine,
fell, and, according to the Bayeux Tapestry, Harold himself was killed late in the
afternoon when he was struck in the eye by an arrow. The leaderless English fought
on until dusk, then broke; a last rally in the gloom caused the Normans further
casualties and endangered William himself. As darkness fell, the English scattered,
leaving William the winner of one of the most daring gambles in history. After the
battle his army moved to isolate London, where William I was crowned king on
December 25.

._ The Editors of Encvclopaedia Britannica

Contents

https:/Avww.britannica.com/event/Battle-of-Hastings 7/19
29/11/2022, 22:44 Battle of Hastings | Summary, Facts, & Significance | Britannica
e
Hastings $ Actions

district England, United Kingdom —
By The Editors f Encyclopaedia Britanfiica » Edit History

=: Table of Contents

 

Hastings

Hastings, borough (district), administrative county of East Sussex, historic county
of Sussex, England.

in modern times as a seaside resort. Prehistoric earthworks and the ruins of a
medieval castle crown Castle Hill, which is situated on the sandstone cliffs
overlooking the old fishing settlement and port at the mouth of a steep valley. The
main shopping centre lies west of that old nucleus, which is notable for its numerous
antique shops. The resort has developed along the seafront to the west, where, since
1872, the borough has also included St. Leonards. The seaside resort is also
noteworthy for its winter chess congress. The site of the Battle of Hastings (1066) lies

29;

https:/Avww.britannica.com/event/Battle-of-Hastings 8/9
29/11/2022, 22:44 Battle of Hastings | Summary, Facts, & Significance | Britannica

4 - r - 7 7

Update Privacy Preferences

https:/Avww.britannica.com/event/Battle-of-Hastings 9/9