REVIEW
published: 27 November 2019
doi: 10.3389/fncel.2019.00528

Traumatic Brain Injuries:
Pathophysiology and Potential
Therapeutic Targets
Si Yun Ng 1 and Alan Yiu Wah Lee 1,2 *
1

Neurobiology/Ageing Program, Centre for Life Sciences, Department of Physiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, Life
Sciences Institute, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 2 School of Pharmacy, Monash University
Malaysia, Bandar Sunway, Malaysia

Edited by:
Shuxin Li,
Temple University, United States
Reviewed by:
Maria Dolores Ganfornina,
University of Valladolid, Spain
Xiaoming Jin,
Indiana University, Purdue University
Indianapolis, United States
*Correspondence:
Alan Yiu Wah Lee
alan.lee@monash.edu
Received: 10 July 2019
Accepted: 13 November 2019
Published: 27 November 2019
Citation:
Ng SY and Lee AYW
(2019) Traumatic Brain Injuries:
Pathophysiology and Potential
Therapeutic Targets.
Front. Cell. Neurosci. 13:528.
doi: 10.3389/fncel.2019.00528

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) remains one of the leading causes of morbidity and mortality
amongst civilians and military personnel globally. Despite advances in our knowledge
of the complex pathophysiology of TBI, the underlying mechanisms are yet to be fully
elucidated. While initial brain insult involves acute and irreversible primary damage to the
parenchyma, the ensuing secondary brain injuries often progress slowly over months
to years, hence providing a window for therapeutic interventions. To date, hallmark
events during delayed secondary CNS damage include Wallerian degeneration of axons,
mitochondrial dysfunction, excitotoxicity, oxidative stress and apoptotic cell death of
neurons and glia. Extensive research has been directed to the identification of druggable
targets associated with these processes. Furthermore, tremendous effort has been
put forth to improve the bioavailability of therapeutics to CNS by devising strategies
for efficient, specific and controlled delivery of bioactive agents to cellular targets.
Here, we give an overview of the pathophysiology of TBI and the underlying molecular
mechanisms, followed by an update on novel therapeutic targets and agents. Recent
development of various approaches of drug delivery to the CNS is also discussed.
Keywords: CNS trauma, secondary injuries, neuronal regeneration, cell penetrating proteins, biopolymers,
controlled drug release

INTRODUCTION
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) has been one of the leading causes of morbidity, disability and
mortality across all ages (Bruns and Hauser, 2003; Dewan et al., 2018). Globally, more than
50 million individuals suffer from TBIs each year (Maas et al., 2017). As of 2005, approximately
3.17 million TBI survivors experience post-traumatic complications ranging from neurological,
psychosocial problems to long-term disability (Zaloshnja et al., 2008; Bazarian et al., 2009). The
immense expenditure on clinical management of TBI patients and associated socioeconomic
problems have imposed a heavy burden on the healthcare system and the society (Finkelstein
et al., 2006). While increasing understanding of the clinical characteristics and the underlying
complex pathophysiological mechanisms of TBI has led to the development of novel and promising
therapeutic approaches that show promising effects in preclinical studies and phase I/II trials,
majority of them turn out to be unsuccessful in phase III clinical trials. In fact, more than
30 clinical trials of TBI pharmaceutical agents for diagnostics or therapeutic purposes have failed
over the past three decades. This review presents an overview of the molecular and cellular events
in the pathogenesis of TBI. An update on potential druggable targets and new direction of treatment

Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

1

November 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 528

Ng and Lee

Pathophysiology and Therapy of Traumatic Brain Injuries

edema (Cernak and Noble-Haeusslein, 2009). Apart from the
clinical characteristics mentioned above, post-traumatic stress
disorder is frequently associated with explosive blast TBI, and
research has shown a high occurrence rate in TBI survivors
(Risdall and Menon, 2011).

is provided, followed by a discussion on various approaches to
delivering these therapeutics in a controlled manner.

CATEGORIES OF TBI
According to the unique physical mechanisms of insult, TBI can
be divided into three categories: (i) closed head; (ii) penetrating;
and (iii) explosive blast TBI. Clinical features of TBI include
prolonged coma, headache, nausea, aphasia, seizures, amnesia
and behavioral abnormalities such as aggression and anxiety,
which occur within seconds to minutes after TBI; however, some
of these manifestations can persist up to months and years (Bruns
and Hauser, 2003; Andriessen et al., 2010).
Closed head TBI is typically caused by blunt impact incurred
mainly from motor vehicle accidents, falls and sports activities.
The incidence rate of this form of TBI is the highest amongst
the civilian population. The strong blunt and compression
contact force disrupts normal functioning of the brain directly
underneath the site of impact, thus causing immediate damage
to brain vasculature and neuronal cells. Brain displacement due
to vibrations and shocks generated during the impact can also
lead to compression of brain tissues and reduction of cerebral
blood flow. Both mechanisms eventually result in focal localized
contusions or diffuse injury to other brain regions.
Penetrating TBI results when a foreign body penetrates the
skull and traverses through the dura into brain parenchyma.
Similar to closed head TBI, laceration of brain tissues primarily
causes focal damages, intracranial hemorrhage, cerebral edema
and ischemia. The invasion of fast-moving projectile can lead
to tissue cavitation, which further exacerbates injuries. The type
and severity of neurological damage are dependent on the size,
speed, route and strength of the external body penetrating the
brain. Due to exposure of brain tissue to the harsh environment,
the chance of infection is relatively high in this form of TBI.
With the invasive nature of this type of injury, penetrating TBI is
associated with acute medical complications such as respiratory
failure, pneumonitis, hypotonia and cerebrospinal leakage in
comparison to closed head TBI (Black et al., 2002).
With the high prevalence of casualties suffering from
war-related TBI in the 20th century mainly in Afghanistan
and Iraq, explosive blast TBI has recently been considered
as a new category (Warden, 2006). Unlike closed head and
penetrating TBI, the brain is compromised by rapid pressure
shock waves generated from explosion, which transmits a
tremendous amount of energy from the skull into the enclosed
brain parenchyma (Ling and Ecklund, 2011). The effects of
blast injury can be divided into different patterns: primary
(shock wave causing internal damage), secondary (penetrating),
tertiary (physical injury by blast wave) and quaternary (other
than the first three classes) depending on the injury outcome
at different stages of blast-induced injury (Cernak and NobleHaeusslein, 2009; Risdall and Menon, 2011). Kinetic energy
generated in the blast causes deformation of the brain, thus
creating a widespread diffuse injury in both the gray and
the white matter, leading to neuronal cell death, axonal
injury, compromised blood-brain-barrier (BBB), vasospasm,
pseudoaneurysm formation, hyperemia, contusion and cerebral

Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF TBI
Damages of neuronal tissues associated with TBI fall into
two categories: (i) primary injury, which is directly caused by
mechanical forces during the initial insult; and (ii) secondary
injury, which refers to further tissue and cellular damages
following primary insult.

Primary Brain Injuries
The immediate impact of different mechanical insults to the
brain can cause two types of primary injuries: focal and diffuse
brain injuries. Studies have demonstrated that the co-existence
of both types of injuries is common in patients who suffered
from moderate to severe TBI (Skandsen et al., 2010); however,
diffuse axonal injury (DAI) accounts for approximately 70% of
TBI cases. As a consequence of lacerations, compression and
concussion forces, closed head TBI and penetrating TBI exhibit
focal brain damage with evidence of skull fracture and localized
contusion at the core of injury site (coup; Schmidt et al., 2004).
Necrotic area of neuronal and glial cells is concentrated at the
coup with compromised blood supply, causing the occurrence of
hematoma, epidural, subdural and intracerebral hemorrhages at
confined layers of the brain. Secondary contusion may develop
in tissues opposite to or surrounding the coup (contre-coup) due
to secondary impact when the brain rebounds and strikes the
skull (Schmidt et al., 2004). Depending on the severity of the
injury, it can lead to cognitive deficits, behavioral changes and
hemiparesis. In contrast to focal injury, the main mechanism of
diffuse brain injury is non-contact forces of rapid deceleration
and acceleration which cause shearing and stretching injury
in cerebral brain tissues. The strong tensile forces damage
neuronal axons, oligodendrocytes and blood vasculature, leading
to brain edema and ischemic brain damage (Smith et al., 2003).
The hallmark feature of diffuse TBI is extensive damage of
axons predominantly in subcortical and deep white matter
tissue such as the brain stem and corpus callosum, which
involves impairment of axonal transport and degradation of
axonal cytoskeleton. Notably, these axonal damages can persist
up to months following TBI, suggesting an association with
delayed secondary pathology of hemorrhages and brain edema
(Saatman et al., 2008). The degree of axonal injury and neuronal
degeneration determines the severity of TBI. Interestingly, while
explosive blast TBI is a result of shock waves instead of
inertial forces, it displays the characteristics of a typical diffuse
brain injury.

Secondary Brain Injuries
The biochemical, cellular and physiological events that
occur during primary injury often progress into delayed
and prolonged secondary damages which can last from
hours to years. Mechanistically, a number of factors

2

November 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 528

Ng and Lee

Pathophysiology and Therapy of Traumatic Brain Injuries

death over an extended period, which correlate with increased
mortality rate and worsened 6-month neurological outcome
(Deshpande et al., 2008; Chamoun et al., 2010).

contribute to secondary injuries, which include excitotoxicity,
mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, lipid peroxidation,
neuroinflammation, axon degeneration and apoptotic cell death
(Ray et al., 2002; Figure 1).

Mitochondrial Dysfunction
Mitochondrial dysfunction is one of the hallmark events of
TBI (Xiong et al., 1997), which contributes to metabolic
and physiologic deregulations that cause cell death. The
sequestration of intracellular Ca2+ and influx of excessive
ions into mitochondria results in the production of ROS,
depolarization of mitochondrial membrane and inhibition of
ATP synthesis (Lifshitz et al., 2004; Singh et al., 2006). This leads
to the breakdown of electron transport chain and impairment
of oxidative phosphorylation processes, thus disrupting the
restoration of metabolic reactions for cell survival and regulation
of calcium cycle. Mitochondrial permeability transition pore
(mPTP) is also activated under these conditions. Conformational
change of an inner membrane protein adenine nucleotide
translocator (ANT) upon binding to cyclophilin D leads to
the opening of mPTP and an increase in inner membrane
permeability (Susin et al., 1998; Naga et al., 2007; Tsujimoto and
Shimizu, 2007), further contributing to mitochondrial pathology.
Electron microscopy analysis of mitochondria has revealed
significant swelling and structural damages such as disruption of
cristae membrane and loss of membrane potential. Furthermore,
mitochondrial proteins such as cytochrome c and apoptosisinducing factor (AIF) which play crucial roles in apoptotic
cell death are released into the cytosol (Sullivan et al., 2002;
Singh et al., 2006).

Excitotoxicity
Studies in both animals and humans have demonstrated that BBB
breakdown and primary neuronal cell death during TBI induce
excessive release of excitatory amino acids such as glutamate and
aspartate from presynaptic nerve terminals (Faden et al., 1989;
Chamoun et al., 2010). The presence of excessive glutamate
during TBI is also contributed by a failure of glutamate re-uptake
due to the dysfunction of glutamate transporters. There has been
evidence that shows a 40% decline in the expression of astrocytic
sodium-dependent glutamate transporters GLAST (EAAT1)
and GLT-1 (EAAT2) within 24 h following TBI, leading to a
significant decrease in the resorption of glutamate (Rao et al.,
1998; van Landeghem et al., 2006). These excitatory amino
acids activate both ionotropic glutamate receptors (iGluRs)
and metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs). Members of
iGluRs such as N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor and
α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionate (AMPA)
receptor are ligand-gated ion channels that allow Na+ , K+ and
Ca2+ ionic flux upon binding to glutamate, causing membrane
depolarization in neurons (Meldrum, 2000). NMDA receptor
is peculiar in that it is also voltage-gated and is permeable to
Ca2+ ions. Hyperactivation of AMPA and NMDA receptors by
excessive glutamate has been shown to alter ion homeostasis
in postsynaptic neurons by allowing influx of extracellular
Ca2+ and Na+ ions (Sun et al., 2008; Brustovetsky et al.,
2010). NMDA-induced surge in intracellular Ca2+ initiates the
activation of various downstream signaling molecules, including
Ca2+ /calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (Folkerts et al.,
2007), mitogen activated protein kinases (MAPK; Lu et al.,
2008) and protein phosphatases (Bales et al., 2009). Protein
kinase C is also activated to couple to NMDA receptors, thereby
enhancing Ca2+ influx into postsynaptic neurons (Luo et al.,
2011). Similarly, activation of AMPA receptors can also trigger
the MAPK pathway through calcium-dependent mechanisms
(Schenk et al., 2005). Activation of NMDA receptors by
glutamate promotes the production of reactive oxygen species
(ROS; Reynolds and Hastings, 1995; Girouard et al., 2009)
and nitric oxide (NO; Sattler et al., 1999), which further
exacerbates secondary cell injury. Unlike iGluRs, mGluRs
regulate Ca2+ and downstream signaling via GTP-binding
proteins. Glutamate stimulation of mGluRs triggers the
activation of phospholipase C/inositol-1,4,5-triphosphate, which
in turn mobilizes Ca2+ release from intracellular stores into
the cytosol and triggers the signaling cascades in injured CNS
(Weber, 2012). Excessive Ca2+ in the cytosol also activates a
number of proteins that cause apoptotic cell death, such as
calcineurin, calpain and caspases. In addition, accumulation
of Ca2+ and ROS leads to impairment of mitochondrial
function, further aggravating the deregulation of Ca2+ and ROS
homeostasis. In summary, excessive stimulation of glutamate
receptors due to massive release of excitatory neurotransmitters
leads to post-traumatic oxidative stress and excitotoxic cell

Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

Release of Reactive Oxygen Species and Lipid
Peroxidation
Accumulating evidence suggests that oxidative stress contributes
to TBI pathogenesis to a significant extent. Endogenous ROS
and free radicals are constantly generated following TBI from
various sources, like enzymatic processes, activated neutrophils,
excitotoxic pathways and dysfunctional mitochondria (Xiong
et al., 1997; Shohami and Kohen, 2011). On the other hand,
the accumulation of Ca2+ after TBI increases the activity of
nitric oxide synthases (NOS), which aids in the production
of NO. The reaction between excessive NO and free radical
superoxides results in the formation of peroxynitrite (PN),
which induces oxidative damage and can be measured by
detecting oxidative markers such as 3-nitrotyrosine (3-NT) and
4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNE; Hall et al., 2004). In vivo studies
have shown an increase in the levels of 3-NT and 4-HNE in
ipsilateral cortex and hippocampus (Hall et al., 2004; Singh et al.,
2006; Deng et al., 2007; Ansari et al., 2008a) after TBI. Oxidative
stress is also associated with impaired synaptic plasticity in
injured cortex and hippocampus, with concomitant loss of the
synaptic proteins synapsin-1 and PSD-95 from 24 to 48 h
post-injury (Ansari et al., 2008a,b). These ROS react not only
with proteins and DNA but also polyunsaturated fatty acids
in membrane phospholipids which in turn form lipoperoxyl
radicals, further damaging cell membranes. The increase in
permeability of mitochondria membrane and the oxidation of
membrane proteins leads to an alteration of ion transport.

3

November 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 528

Ng and Lee

Pathophysiology and Therapy of Traumatic Brain Injuries

FIGURE 1 | Schematic representation of pathophysiology of traumatic brain injury (TBI). BBB dysfunction caused by TBI insult allows transmigration of activated
leukocytes into the injured brain parenchyma, which is facilitated by an upregulation of cell adhesion molecules. Activated leukocytes, microglia and astrocytes
produce ROS and inflammatory molecules such as cytokines and chemokines that contribute to demyelination and disruption of axonal cytoskeleton, leading to
axonal swelling and accumulation of transport proteins at the terminals, hence compromising neuronal activity. Progressive axonal damage results in
neurodegeneration. In addition, astrogliosis at the lesion site causes glial scar formation, which creates a non-permissive environment that impedes axonal
regeneration. On the other hand, excessive accumulation of glutamate and aspartate neurotransmitters in the synaptic space due to spillage from severed neurons,
glutamate-induced aggravated release from pre-synaptic nerve terminals and impaired reuptake mechanisms in traumatic and ischemic brain activate NMDA and
AMDA receptors located on post-synaptic membranes, which allow the influx of calcium ions. Together with the release of Ca2+ ions from intracellular store (ER),
these events lead to the production of ROS and activation of calpains. As a result of mitochondrial dysfunction, molecules such as apoptosis-inducing factor (AIF)
and cytochrome c are released into the cytosol. These cellular and molecular events including the interaction of Fas-Fas ligand ultimately lead to caspase-dependent
and -independent neuronal cell death. BBB, blood-brain-barrier; ROS, reactive oxygen species; AMPA, α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid;
NMDA, N-methyl-d-aspartate; ER, endoplasmic reticulum.

Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

4

November 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 528

Ng and Lee

Pathophysiology and Therapy of Traumatic Brain Injuries

Abnormal Ca2+ accumulation, for instance, has profound
implications in prolonged excitotoxicity (Praticò et al., 2002).
In short, the persistent release of highly reactive oxygen free
radicals and the associated elevation in the level of ROS-mediated
lipid peroxidation in TBI impose adverse effects in brain
plasticity, cerebral blood flow, and promote immunosuppression
(Ansari et al., 2008a).

2006). As the hallmark of DAI, these retraction bulbs can
be detected by the axonal markers β-amyloid precursor
protein (β-APP) and neurofilament (NF) as early as 1 day
post-TBI and up to 2 weeks in experimental models of
diffuse TBI. Retraction bulbs are predominantly found in
corpus callosum and pyramidal tracts of brain stem (Pierce
et al., 1996; Hellewell et al., 2010), though their presence
in hippocampus, cortex, cingulum, the internal and external
capsule has also been reported (Hellewell et al., 2010).
Hellewell et al. (2010) has demonstrated the association
between axonal damage in corpus callosum and infiltration of
neuroinflammatory cells (microglia and macrophages) which
would lead to disruption of blood vasculature, degradation
of axons, damage of oligodendrocytes and deformation of
white matter.

Neuroinflammation
Within the acute post-TBI period of 24 h, dysfunction of BBB
allows infiltration of circulating neutrophils, monocytes and
lymphocytes into the injured brain parenchyma (Lotocki et al.,
2009). Analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and post-mortem
tissue of TBI patients (Buttram et al., 2007; Frugier et al., 2009;
Goodman et al., 2009) and tissue of TBI rodents (Ahn et al.,
2004; Lotocki et al., 2009; Semple et al., 2010) revealed that these
polymononuclear leukocytes release complement factors and
pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α, as
evident by an increase in the corresponding mRNA and protein
24 h post-trauma. Sustained upregulation of various cytokines
was found to be associated with altered BBB permeability,
formation of edema and neurological deficits. As a member of the
Fas superfamily, TNF-α interacts closely with Fas ligand which
in turn activates caspases that are essential for programmed cell
death (Morganti-Kossmann et al., 2002). Chemokines such as
MIP-α, MCP-1 and IL-8 (CXCL8) are significantly upregulated
post-trauma, which act synergistically and are involved in further
recruitment of leukocytes to the injury site (Kossmann et al.,
1997; Buttram et al., 2007; Bye et al., 2007; Semple et al., 2010).
Furthermore, upregulated expression of ICAM-1 and VCAM1, which are ligands for endothelial and leukocyte cell adhesion
receptors facilitates the interaction of leukocytes and immune
cells with endothelium, hence promoting their recruitment to the
injured site (Carlos et al., 1997; Rancan et al., 2001). Prolonged
and delayed neuroinflammation in turn recruits macrophages,
activates resident microglia cells and promotes astrogliosis
(Morganti-Kossmann et al., 2007; Bye et al., 2011). Progressive
phagocytosis and persistent inflammatory responses are evident
by the accumulation of macrophages and activated microglia
in TBI survivors years after injury (Gentleman et al., 2004;
Johnson et al., 2013).

Glial Scar and Myelin-Associated Axonal Growth
Inhibitors
Insults to the CNS often trigger activation and proliferation of
astrocytes. The resulting reactive astrocytes infiltrate into the
lesion site and undergo reactive astrogliosis, which involves
hypertrophy and an increase in the complexity of their processes.
Intermingle of astrocytic processes with oligodendrocytes,
meningeal cells, microglia and fibroblasts gradually develop into
a scar-like structure, which has long been implicated as a major
physical impediment to axonal regeneration and counteracts TBI
recovery (Fawcett and Asher, 1999). Recent findings however
suggest that chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs) such
as neurocan and versican in glial scar, which are upregulated
following CNS injury, are in fact the molecular barrier that
impedes axonal regeneration (Asher et al., 2000, 2001, 2002).
Together with other inhibitory molecules in glial scar, such
as tenascins and semaphorin 3A, these molecules constitute a
non-permissive milieu for axonal growth (Zhang et al., 1997;
Pasterkamp et al., 2001; De Winter et al., 2002). Interestingly,
RhoA pathway is implicated in mediating their inhibitory
effects because blockade of RhoA activity or its downstream
effectors promotes permissive growth of neuronal axon on these
substrates (Winton et al., 2002; Monnier et al., 2003). The
signaling cascades triggered by semaphorin 3A in glial scar, for
instance, involve neuropilin-plexin receptor complex and the
activation of Rho GTPases, which are believed to induce growth
cone collapse through the regulation of F-actin cytoskeleton
(Pasterkamp and Kolodkin, 2003).
In addition, damaged myelin in severed axon causes the
exposure of axon outgrowth inhibitors such as myelin-associated
glycoprotein (MAG), oligodendrocyte myelin glycoprotein
(OMgp) and Nogo-A (Chaudhry and Filbin, 2006). Intriguingly,
these myelin-associated inhibitors bind specifically to Nogo
receptor (NgR) complex on neuronal membrane, which consists
of the co-receptors p75NTR , Troy and LINGO-1 (Wang et al.,
2002; Mi et al., 2004; Park et al., 2005). These inhibitors
trigger the activation of RhoA GTPases and Rho kinase that
can induce growth cone collapse and retraction of neurites
(Nash et al., 2009). In fact, post-mortem analysis of traumatized
human brain tissues revealed an increase in the expression
of RhoA and RhoB proteins in reactive glia and swollen

Axonal Degeneration
Wallerian degeneration is widely observed within minutes after
DAI. Immediate mechanical damage leads to disorganization
of axonal cytoskeletal network, which consists of longitudinally
oriented neurofilaments and microtubules (Tang-Schomer et al.,
2010). Together with constant calcium-mediated proteolysis,
acute axonal damage can progress and develop into delayed
and secondary axotomy days and months following the initial
trauma, which is characterized by degradation of myelin sheath,
impairment of axonal transport and accumulation of axonal
transport proteins (Povlishock, 1992; Saatman et al., 2003;
Büki and Povlishock, 2006). Formation of retraction bulbs due
to disassociation of axonal connections and accumulation of
axonal transport proteins in the node can eventually result
in prolonged swelling of injured axons and apoptotic cell
death of neurons and oligodendrocytes (Büki and Povlishock,

Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

5

November 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 528

Ng and Lee

Pathophysiology and Therapy of Traumatic Brain Injuries

lysosome-dependent degradation pathway (Mizushima et al.,
2008). Autophagy plays an important role in cytoprotection,
maintenance of cell stability and survival through elimination
of abnormal intracellular proteins or organelles when cells are
severed or under stress, though it is also implicated in the
regulation of apoptotic cell death, inflammation, and adaptive
immune responses (Maiuri et al., 2007). Macroautophagy is
amongst the best-characterized autophagy subtype, which is a
multi-step process that involves sequestration of cytoplasmic
components such as damaged organelles and proteins in doublemembrane structures known as autophagosomes, followed
by fusion with lysosomes whereby proteolytic degradation
occurs (Mizushima, 2007). This autophagic flux is under tight
regulation by members of the autophagy-related (ATG) protein
family such as ATG9, the autophagosome marker protein
LC3-II that is involved in the recruitment of substrates for
autophagic degradation, and the beclin 1 protein which is
essential for autophagosome formation. Accumulating evidence
suggests the involvement of autophagy-lysosome pathway in
secondary injury processes of TBI and SCI, though whether
it plays beneficial or detrimental roles remains controversial.
Upregulation of autophagic markers and accumulation of
autophagosomes have been observed in early phase of secondary
injury, which correlate with severity and can persist for weeks
to months (Diskin et al., 2005; Clark et al., 2008; Sakai
et al., 2014; Au et al., 2017). The increase in autophagic
flux, which can be potentiated by rapamycin is associated
with improved neurobehavioral function, enhanced neuronal
survival, reduced inflammation and gliosis in injured brain
(Erlich et al., 2007; Zhang Y. B. et al., 2008). In fact,
many neuroprotective drugs alleviate TBI-induced secondary
injury by activating autophagy (Ding et al., 2015; Gao
et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2017). Nonetheless, lysosomal
function is often found to be compromised in TBI, which
involves an increase in lysosomal membrane permeability. This
leads to an impairment of autophagic flux and pathological
accumulation of autophagosomes and their cargo, causing
neuronal cell death and exacerbating the severity of trauma
(Sarkar et al., 2014).

neurites, which could persist up to months after TBI (Brabeck
et al., 2004). In experimentally-induced focal brain injury,
active RhoA was found to be accumulated at the lesioned
cortex and hippocampus 18 h post-trauma (Dubreuil et al.,
2006; Zhang Z. et al., 2008). While the precise role of
Rho GTPase pathway in TBI requires further investigation,
its involvement in related forms of CNS injuries like spinal
cord injury and cerebral ischemia has been well established
(Dubreuil et al., 2003; Yagita et al., 2007). It is suggested
that RhoA not only inhibits axonal regeneration but also
plays a role in apoptotic responses after TBI as constant
upregulation of active RhoA impairs regeneration of axons
and neurites.

Apoptotic Cell Death
Apoptotic cell death of neurons and oligodendrocytes are
hallmarks of secondary brain injury (Beer et al., 2000; Grady
et al., 2003). Smith et al. (1997) have reported that neuronal
cell death is evident in human hippocampus for up to 1 year
after TBI. These apoptotic events involve the activation of
cysteine proteases such as caspases and calpain, and can be
triggered by the interaction of various neurochemical, cellular
and molecular pathways such as extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK), p38 MAPK, janus kinase/signal transducer and
activator of transcription (JAK/STAT; Kawasaki et al., 1997; Mori
et al., 2002; Raghupathi, 2004; Zhao et al., 2011). Apoptotic
cell death caused by caspase-dependent mechanisms can be
induced by the extrinsic death receptor pathway or the intrinsic
mitochondrial pathway (Stoica and Faden, 2010). Extrinsic
pathway involves the interaction of TNF and Fas with their
specific receptors on cell surface, whereas intrinsic pathway is
activated when cytochrome c is released after mitochondrial
depolarization (Sullivan et al., 2002). Cytochrome c forms an
ATP-dependent complex with apoptotic activating protein-1
and ATP in the cytosol. Both mechanisms activate the caspasedependent downstream signaling through upregulation and
activation of caspase 8 and 9 which ultimately lead to the cleavage
and activation of caspase 3 (Clark et al., 1999, 2000; Zhang et al.,
2003). On the other hand, caspase-independent apoptosis in TBI
can be initiated by the activation of calpains through proteolysis
of cytoskeletal proteins such as spectrin and NF proteins
(Deng et al., 2007) and the release of mitochondrial proteins
such as AIF (Hong et al., 2004), Smac/DIABLO, Omi/HtrA2 ,
poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 and endonuclease G (Mammis
et al., 2009). These mitochondrial proteins translocate into the
nucleus and activate downstream signaling molecules, resulting
in DNA damage and chromatin condensation in neuronal
and glial cells. Apoptosis can be regulated by anti-apoptotic
proteins such as the Bcl-2 family and death-inducing factors
such as Bax (Wennersten et al., 2003). Studies have shown
that Bcl-2 protein expression is significantly upregulated in
brain tissues of TBI patients (Clark et al., 1999). Similarly, a
25% increase in Bax protein was observed in traumatic rat
brain (Raghupathi et al., 2003).

POTENTIAL THERAPEUTICS
Since primary injuries in TBI usually involve acute physical
damages and necrotic cell death that are unlikely to be
reversible, treatment regimens mainly aim to stabilize the
site of injury and prevent it from secondary damage. As
mentioned above, secondary injuries are caused by an array
of risk factors and develop in a progressive manner. This
provides a window for therapeutic intervention of events that
could induce further loss of neurons and glial cells beyond
the injury epicenter, which include persistent inflammatory
response, excitotoxicity, oxidative stress and apoptotic cell death
(Ray et al., 2002). Extensive research has been dedicated to
gain a better understanding of the underlying mechanisms
of secondary brain injuries (Table 1), in the hope of
developing more effective therapeutic strategies to target
multiple stages.

Impairment of Autophagy and Lysosomal Pathways
Autophagy is an adaptive homeostatic process that regulates
the turnover of cellular organelles and proteins through

Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

6

November 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 528

Ng and Lee

Pathophysiology and Therapy of Traumatic Brain Injuries

TABLE 1 | Summary of the pathophysiology, therapeutic targets and potential therapies in traumatic brain injuries.
Pathophysiology

Therapeutic targets

Potential therapies

Clinical trials

Treatment efficacy

Excitotoxicity

Glutamate receptors, Ca2+
channels,
calpains/caspases

Glutamate receptor antagonists
HU211 (Dexanbionol; Nadler
et al., 1993, 1995; Shohami et al.,
1995), MK 801 (Goda et al.,
2002; Imer et al., 2009), NBQX
(Follett et al., 2000)

Dexanbionol: NCT00129857

Neuroprotective effect in
experimental TBI but not
efficacious in clinical trials
(Maas et al., 2006)

Ca2+ channel inhibitors
(S)-emopamil (Okiyama et al.,
1992, 1994), SNX-111
(Ziconotide; Samii et al., 1999)
and SNX-185 (Lee et al., 2004;
Shahlaie et al., 2009), Nimodipine
(Veng et al., 2003), Nicarpine
(Compton et al., 1990)
Calpain/caspase inhibitors
MDL 28170 (Kawamura et al.,
2005), Z DEVD-fmk (Knoblach
et al., 2004)
Mitochondrial dysfunction

ROS, mPTP components,
cytochrome c

Neuroprotectants
Cyclosporine A (Okonkwo and
Povlishock, 1999; Sullivan et al.,
1999)

NeuroSTAT: NCT01825044;
EudraCT 2012-000756-34

Anti-oxidative effect reduces
axonal damage and
mitochondrial dysfunction in
animal TBI. Phase IIa trial
confirmed drug safety and
BBB permeability (Kelsen
et al., 2019)

Oxidative stress

ROS

Anti-inflammatory agents
Methylprednisolone (Hall, 1992)

Methylprednisolone:
ISRCTN74459797;
NCT00004759

Anti-inflammatory and
anti-oxidative effects. Early
administration of
methyl-prednisolone is
associated with higher risk of
death in patients with head
injury (Thompson and Bakshi,
2005)

Anti-inflammatory agents
Minocycline (Tikka and
Koistinaho, 2001; Bye et al.,
2007; Filipovic and Zecevic,
2008; Ng et al., 2012)

Minocycline: NCT01058395;
NCT02802631

Anti-inflammatory and
anti-apoptotic effects.
Erythropoietin shows no
beneficial effect in moderate
or severe TBI patients (Nichol
et al., 2015)

Anti-apoptosis
Erythropoietin (Yatsiv et al., 2005;
Chen et al., 2007)

Erythropoietin:
NCT00987454;
NCT00313716

Neuroprotectants
Cyclosporine A (Turkoglu et al.,
2010)

Neuroinflammation

Axonal degeneration

Pro-inflammatory
chemokines, complement
factors

Calpains, NOS

Glutamate receptor antagonists
NBQX (Follett et al., 2000; Goda
et al., 2002)

Anti-apoptotic,
anti-inflammatory,
neuroprotection

Calpain inhibitors
MDL 28170 (Buki et al., 2003; Ai
et al., 2007; Czeiter et al., 2009)
Anti-inflammatory agents
Minocycline (Siopi et al., 2011)
Neuroprotectants
Cyclosporine A (Okonkwo and
Povlishock, 1999; Okonkwo
et al., 1999)
Anti-apoptosis
Erythropoietin
(Yatsiv et al., 2005)
(Continued)

Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

7

November 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 528

Ng and Lee

Pathophysiology and Therapy of Traumatic Brain Injuries

TABLE 1 | Continued
Patho-physiology

Therapeutic targets

Potential therapies

Clinical trials

Treatment efficacy

Stem cells therapy
Marrow stromal cells (Mahmood
et al., 2004b), mesenchymal stem
cells (Kim et al., 2009), fetal stem
cells (Riess et al., 2002; Skardelly
et al., 2011)
Neurotrophic factors
BDNF, NGF (Kromer, 1987; Dixon
et al., 1997; Sinson et al., 1997),
bFGF (Dietrich et al., 1996), EGF
(Laskowski et al., 2005)
Apoptosis

Caspases, calpains,
cytochrome c

Calpain/caspase inhibitors
MDL 28170 (Kawamura et al.,
2005; Thompson et al., 2010), Z
DEVD-fmk (Clark et al., 2000;
Knoblach et al., 2004)

Anti-apoptosis

Anti-apoptosis
Erythropoietin (Yatsiv et al., 2005;
Liao et al., 2008)
Stem cells therapy
Mesenchymal stem cells (Kim
et al., 2009)
Impaired
autophagy-lysosomal
pathway

mTOR

Rapamycin (Erlich et al., 2007;
Zhang Y. B. et al., 2008), Luteolin
(Xu et al., 2014)

Myelin-derived inhibitors

Nogo and NgR, MAG,
OMgp, RhoA

Myelin inhibitors
IN-1 antibody against Nogo-A (Yu
et al., 2008), DNA vaccine against
myelin inhibitors (Zhang et al.,
2009)

IN-1 antibody: NCT03935321

Intrathecal administration of
anti-Nogo-A to SCI patients is
well-tolerated in phase I trial
(Kucher et al., 2018)

RhoA inhibitors
C3 transferase (Tan et al., 2007;
Höltje et al., 2009; Boato et al.,
2010)

Cethrin (BA-210:
NCT00500812; VX-210:
NCT02669849)

Treatment of SCI patients with
Cethrin is well-tolerated in
phase I/IIa trial (McKerracher
and Anderson, 2013)

Glial scar

CSPGs, tenascins,
semaphorins

Glial scar
Chondrotinase ABC (Bradbury
et al., 2002; Barritt et al., 2006;
Lin et al., 2008)

Neuroprotection

Chondrotinase ABC
promotes axon outgrowth
and regeneration in SCI
animals

RhoA inhibitor
C3 transferase (Monnier et al.,
2003)

(dizocilpine) has been shown to reduce oxidative stress, microglia
activation, oxidative stress, axonal damage and neuronal cell
death (Goda et al., 2002; Imer et al., 2009). Importantly, these
effects are associated with an improvement of cognitive function
and neurological outcome (Shohami et al., 1995, 1997). Similarly,
the AMPA receptor antagonist NBQX was shown to attenuate
damages in neuronal axons and oligodendrocytes (Follett
et al., 2000; Goda et al., 2002). While these glutamate receptor
antagonists exhibit neuroprotective effects in various models
of experimental TBI, they failed to improve the neurological
outcome of TBI patients in clinical trials (Maas et al., 2006, 2010;
Jain, 2008). The discrepancy between preclinical animal study
and clinical trials in patients could have been due to the fact
that glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity is an acute phenomenon

Protection of Neurons and Glia Against
Excitotoxicity
Glutamate Receptor Antagonists
HU-211 (dexanabinol), a non-competitive NMDA receptor
antagonist, has been shown to attenuate NMDA receptormediated neurotoxicity in neuronal cultures (Nadler et al.,
1993). It is equally potent in vivo, as evident by a significant
reduction in NMDA-induced Ca2+ accumulation in rat
brain when administered 3 days post-trauma (Nadler et al.,
1995). Post-traumatic administration of HU-211 reduces BBB
dysfunction, brain edema, TNF-α production as well as apoptosis
of glial and neuronal cells (Eshhar et al., 1995; Shohami et al.,
1997). Similarly, another NMDA receptor antagonist MK 801

Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

8

November 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 528

Ng and Lee

Pathophysiology and Therapy of Traumatic Brain Injuries

in injured axons (Buki et al., 2003; Ai et al., 2007; Czeiter et al.,
2009). Similarly, the caspase-3 inhibitor Z-DEVD-fmk reduces
neuronal cell death in neuron-glial co-culture, and is sufficient
for improving neurologic function and reducing lesion volumes
in induced injury in mouse and rat brain (Clark et al., 2000;
Knoblach et al., 2004).

shortly after primary neuronal injury. The persistent elevated
level of glutamate in traumatized human brain may instead be
a neuroprotective mechanism that maintains survival of spared
neurons, as supported by earlier reports that demonstrated
the pro-apoptotic role of NMDA-receptor antagonists in
primary hippocampal neurons (Hardingham et al., 2002). In
fact, NMDAR is known to mediate both neuroprotective and
neurotoxic effects (Hardingham, 2009). The opposing function
is believed to be due to distinct properties and differential
distribution of GluN2 subunits of tetrameric NMDAR. GluN2Acontaining receptors are mainly localized to synapses, while
GluN2B-containing receptors are found in both synaptic and
extrasynaptic locations. GluN2A is known to be pro-survival
whereas GluN2B promotes cell death following excitotoxic
glutamate stimulation (Liu et al., 2007). Blocking NMDAR
function in a non-discriminating manner, therefore, may not
reduce excitotoxicity but suppress pro-survival signals.

Combating Chemical Stress to Neurons
and Glia
Antioxidants
The immunosuppressive drug cyclosporine A, a potent regulator
of mPTP, has been demonstrated to have neuroprotective effects
in experimental models of TBI (Kulbe et al., 2018). Although
the exact mechanistic action of cyclosporine A remains poorly
understood, its administration after TBI is associated with
reduced accumulation of Ca2+ through binding of the cytosolic
phophastase calcineurin to Cyp-D at mPTP. Cyclosporine
treatment also inhibits the mitochondrial release of cytochrome
c and influx of Ca2+ into mitochondria (Sullivan et al., 2005).
Furthermore, cyclosporine A exhibits anti-oxidative properties
by downregulating lipid peroxidation (Turkoglu et al., 2010).
These effects lead to an amelioration of axonal damage and
mitochondrial dysfunction, which result in a reduction of
cortical damage and an improvement in neurological outcome
(Okonkwo and Povlishock, 1999; Okonkwo et al., 1999; Scheff
and Sullivan, 1999; Sullivan et al., 1999, 2000, 2010; Alessandri
et al., 2002; Mbye et al., 2008). Nonetheless, it should be noted
that a small randomized clinical trial of cyclosporine A in TBI
surprisingly showed no improvement in neurological outcome
and biochemical parameters in patients as compared to healthy
individuals (Mazzeo et al., 2009). Despite this, a European multicenter phase II/III clinical trial of NeuroSTAT, a drug developed
by NeuroViVe in which cyclosporine A is the active ingredient,
has recently been initiated in TBI patients and the outcome is yet
to be evaluated.
Methylprednisolone is a synthetic glucocorticoid that
has been widely used in clinical treatment of acute CNS
injuries mainly because of its potency in anti-inflammation
and in controlling edema in injured CNS. Interestingly, a
high dose of methylprednisolone exhibits neuroprotective
effects due to its anti-oxidative properties which specifically
attenuates post-traumatic lipid peroxidation. Although little
is known about the mechanism of the antioxidant effect
of methylprednisolone, it is believed to integrate into the
structure of lipid bilayer and render cell membranes more rigid,
thereby limiting the mobility of lipid peroxyl radicals (Hall,
1992). Notably, methylprednisolone has to be administered
at initial phase of CNS injury at an optimal concentration
to ensure maximal anti-inflammatory and neuroprotective
effects. Methylprednisolone was formerly incorporated into
a randomized placebo-controlled trial known as CRASH in
2004. A large sample size of more than 10,000 TBI patients
was recruited into the study with a 2-week follow-up period.
Nonetheless, the outcome was undesirable with an increase
in mortality rate (Thompson and Bakshi, 2005). In fact, rats
treated with methylprednisolone also showed a significant

Inhibitors of Calcium Channels and
Calcium-Activated Enzymes
Hyperactivation of voltage-sensitive ion channels such as Land N- calcium channels, which causes prolonged alterations in
calcium homeostasis is another important factor that contributes
to excitotoxicity during secondary injuries in TBI. Many calcium
channel inhibitors have in fact been demonstrated to be
neuroprotective in experimental TBI. In a fluid percussion
brain injury rat model, the calcium channel blocker SNX-111
(Ziconotide) was found to reduce trauma-induced calcium
accumulation by 50–70% in the ipsilateral regions as early
as 6 h post-trauma (Samii et al., 1999). Another calcium
channel inhibitor (S)-emopamil has been shown to reduce brain
edema and cerebral blood flow (Okiyama et al., 1992, 1994).
Both SNX-111 and (S)-emopamil are able to ameliorate motor
and cognitive deficits associated with brain injury (Okiyama
et al., 1992; Berman et al., 2000; Verweij et al., 2000). With
a 45% amino acid similarity, SNX-185 works in a similar
mechanism as SNX-111 but with improved bioavailability and
extended sustainability in the brain (Newcomb et al., 2000;
Lee et al., 2004). The L-type voltage-sensitive calcium channel
antagonist nimodipine was also found to have beneficial effect
for memory impairment in rats, though clinical trials were
terminated because of its hypotensive effects and the lack of
improvement in intracranial pressure observed in TBI survivors
(Bailey et al., 1991; Veng et al., 2003; Maas et al., 2010).
In addition, clinical benefits are also modest in trials of the
calcium channel blocker nicardipine (Compton et al., 1990).
Recent studies suggested that the calpain inhibitor MDL-28170
suppresses degradation of the cytoskeletal protein α-spectrin
localized at sites of neuronal damage in both TBI and hypoxicischemic injury, which is associated with a reduction in necrosis
and apoptosis through the inhibition of calpains and caspase-3
(Kawamura et al., 2005; Thompson et al., 2010). Pre-treatment of
TBI animals with MD-28170 also exerts neuroprotective effects
through the preservation of axonal structure and reduction
in axolemmal leakage, as demonstrated by a decrease in
immunolabeling of APP (marker for defective axoplasmic
transport) and RMO-14 (marker for neurofilament compaction)

Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

9

November 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 528

Ng and Lee

Pathophysiology and Therapy of Traumatic Brain Injuries

proteins phospho-Akt and Bcl-XL (Yatsiv et al., 2005; Liao
et al., 2008). In addition, Bcl-2 gene expression is increased,
with a corresponding reduction in Bax level (Liao et al., 2009).
Other beneficial effects include enhanced neurogenesis, reduced
production of NO, and amelioration of brain swelling, cortical
tissue and axonal damage (Lu et al., 2005; Yatsiv et al., 2005;
Cherian et al., 2007). These effects of EPO are associated
with an improvement in cognitive and motor functions (Lu
et al., 2005; Yatsiv et al., 2005; Xiong et al., 2010). In 2010, the
neuroprotective effects of EPO in experimental TBI have been
successfully translated into a clinical trial involving patients
with moderate to severe TBI in a joint study between Australia
and New Zealand. Nonetheless, the results showed that EPO
did not reduce the number of patients with severe neurological
dysfunction (Nichol et al., 2015).

increase in neuronal apoptosis in the hypothalamus, pituitary
and hippocampus (Chen et al., 2011; Zhang et al., 2011),
which are associated with memory and learning impairment
(Chen et al., 2009).

Anti-inflammatory and Anti-apoptotic Agents
With the ability to transmigrate and diffuse across BBB, the
semi-synthetic tetracycline derivative minocycline has been
found to exhibit anti-inflammatory and anti-apoptotic properties
in various experimental models of neurological diseases such as
stroke, SCI, Alzhemier’s disease and TBI. Numerous studies have
demonstrated that the neuroprotective effects of minocycline
can be attributed to its inhibition of microglia activation,
proliferation and production of pro-inflammatory cytokines
such as IL-1β, IL-6 and TNF-α (Sanchez Mejia et al., 2001;
Bye et al., 2007; Choi et al., 2007; Parachikova et al., 2010;
Garrido-Mesa et al., 2013). In an experimental mouse model of
closed head injury, for instance, minocycline treatment causes
a marked decrease in IL-1β level in the cortex by 50%, with
concomitant inhibition of microglia activation and improvement
in neurological outcome (Bye et al., 2007; Ng et al., 2012).
Interestingly, minocycline treatment has been found to inhibit
matrix metalloproteinases and preserve BBB integrity, leading
to an alleviation of cerebral edema (Homsi et al., 2009).
Minocycline has also been shown to exhibit anti-apoptotic
properties by inhibiting caspase activities (Sanchez Mejia et al.,
2001). In addition, Siopi et al. (2011) have reported that
minocycline treatment results in significant restoration of the
level of neuroprotective soluble APPα 24 h post-trauma, hence
contributing to the protection of damaged axons. A recent study
has reported that early administration of minocycline decreases
various inflammatory and glial protein markers such as MCP-1
and S100β at 51 days post-trauma, with concomitant significant
improvement in locomotion, anxiety and spatial memory in an
experimental rat model of mild blast TBI. This suggests that
minocycline might have a long-lasting neuroprotective effect
(Kovesdi et al., 2012).
Erythropoietin (EPO) belongs to type 1 cytokine superfamily.
The expression of both EPO and EPO receptor is significantly
upregulated in TBI, which plays an important role in
neuroprotection though the exact mechanisms remain elusive
(Brines et al., 2000). It is evident that the EPO/EPOR interaction
allows phosphorylation of receptor-associated Jak-2, which in
turn activates various signaling pathways, including caspases,
Ras/MAPK, nuclear factor Kappa B and Stat-5 (Fujitani et al.,
1997; Mammis et al., 2009). Intriguingly, further research
indicated that EPO can exert neuroprotective effect in the
absence of EPO receptor. These EPO-mediated mechanisms
are found to have prominent roles in inflammatory response
and apoptotic cell death (Yatsiv et al., 2005; Xiong et al., 2010).
Studies in rats have demonstrated that EPO treatment suppresses
neuroinflammation with evidence of significant downregulation
of adhesion molecules, NF-kb and pro-inflammatory cytokines
such as IL-6, IL-1β and TNF-α (Chen et al., 2007), as well as
a reduction in astrocytic response and microglia activation
(Yatsiv et al., 2005). EPO has also been shown to have
anti-apoptotic effects by upregulation of the anti-apoptotic

Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

Promotion of Neuronal Regeneration
Neurotrophic Factors
Neurotrophic factors including vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF), brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), nerve
growth factor (NGF), basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) and
epidermal growth factor (EGF) are capable of determining the
post-traumatic fate of neuronal and glial cells. Administration
of these growth factors following TBI can improve neurological
outcome (Wu et al., 2008; Sun et al., 2009). Exogenous VEGF, for
instance, increases astrocytic response, promotes angiogenesis
and enhances neurogenesis in experimental model of TBI
through the activation of Akt pathway and the Raf/MEK/ERK
cascade (Wu et al., 2008; Thau-Zuchman et al., 2010; Lu et al.,
2011). VEGF also reduces apoptotic cell death and promotes
neurite outgrowth via Rho-dependent pathway (Jin et al., 2006).
Administration of NGF into the lateral ventricles or
parenchyma of injured adult rat brain has been shown to
promote survival of cholinergic septal neurons and reduce
neuronal cell death, which are in accordance with the
improvement in memory retention and cognitive deficits
(Kromer, 1987; Dixon et al., 1997; Sinson et al., 1997). Similarly,
exogenous infusion of BDNF contributes to improvement in
histological deficits and neurological function, and promotion
of axonal regeneration in experimental models of excitotoxicity,
cerebral ischemia and SCI (Burke et al., 1994; Schäbitz et al.,
1997; Namiki et al., 2000). It should be noted, however, that
Blaha et al. (2000) have shown no improvement in memory
loss and alterations in apoptotic cell death in both the injured
cortex and hippocampus after post-traumatic intraparenchymal
infusion of BDNF. In an in vitro model of focal trauma using rat
hippocampal slice culture, bFGF and EGF treatment promotes
survival of existing neurons and formation of new neurons in
the dentate gyrus, as evident by NeuN immunostaining and a
significant increase in BrdU-positive newborn progenitor cells,
respectively (Laskowski et al., 2005). Similar beneficial effects are
observed when bFGF is administered into the brain ventricles of
TBI rats, which results in a significant recovery of TBI-induced
neurological deficits (Sun et al., 2009).
Infusion of bFGF to rat brain 3 h after injury induced by
lateral fluid percussion can still significantly reduce neuronal
damage and lesion volume (Dietrich et al., 1996). In fact,

10

November 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 528

Ng and Lee

Pathophysiology and Therapy of Traumatic Brain Injuries

axonal regeneration. Recent studies have reported that DNA
vaccines against the myelin-derived inhibitors Nogo, MAG and
OMgp promote axonal repair in the corticorubral projection
and improve neurological outcome in experimental models of
TBI and stroke in rats (Zhu et al., 2007; Zhang et al., 2009).
Immunization of rats against Nogo receptor (NgR) after induced
spine injury also promotes axonal regeneration and functional
recovery (Yu et al., 2007, 2008). DNA vaccination is a novel and
relatively simple technique to induce an immunological response
by injection of genetically engineered DNA encoding the antigen
into the body so as to trigger immune system in the host. These
studies demonstrated that DNA vaccine against myelin-derived
inhibitors might be a promising approach to promote recovery of
injured CNS. More detailed investigation is required to validate
the effects and to better understand the mechanistic action and
potential side effects of these DNA vaccines.

severed CNS has been found to produce various growth factors
after injuries. Chiaretti et al. (2008, 2009) showed a significant
upregulation of NGF in the CSF of children with severe TBI,
which correlates with an improvement in Glasgow recovery
scores. An upregulation of BDNF and its receptor at the cortical
lesion site was also observed in induced TBI in non-human
primates (Nagamoto-Combs et al., 2007). Taken together, these
studies suggest that neurotrophic factors are able to confer
neuroprotection after TBI.

Suppression of RhoA GTPase
Accumulating evidence has demonstrated that central neurons
have the potential to regenerate, though the process is largely
suppressed by the non-permissive environment in injured CNS.
Recently, the small GTPase RhoA has emerged to play a
pivotal role in mediating the effect of inhibitory molecules
in glial scar and damaged myelin against axonal regeneration.
Exoenzyme C3 transferase is an enzyme found in Clostridium
botulinum that ADP-ribosylates Rho proteins by transferring
the ADP-ribose moiety from NAD to the acceptor amino acid
residue asparagine-41 of Rho proteins, thereby blocking the
downstream signaling that causes growth cone collapse and
inhibition of axonal regeneration (Aktories et al., 2005). The
effect of C3 transferase in promoting axonal regeneration has
been extensively studied in both in vitro and in vivo animal
models of SCI and peripheral nerve injury (Tan et al., 2007;
Höltje et al., 2009; Boato et al., 2010; Huelsenbeck et al.,
2012). Rats subjected to experimental SCI showed improvement
in neurological outcomes upon treatment with C3 peptide
(Boato et al., 2010). With the same enzymatic activity as the
original C3 bacterial toxin exoenzyme, the C3 derivative BA-210
has been demonstrated to enhance functional regeneration in
animal models of spine injuries (Lord-Fontaine et al., 2008).
Importantly, it can maintain its stability after 18 months of
storage at low temperatures (Lord-Fontaine et al., 2008). The
drug Cethrin/VX-210 (in which BA-210 is the active ingredient)
has passed phase I/IIa open-label clinical trial that assesses
its safety, tolerability and treatment efficacy in SCI patients
(Fehlings et al., 2011; McKerracher and Anderson, 2013), and
is currently going through phase IIb/III trial to evaluate its
efficacy and safety in patients with acute traumatic cervical
SCI. In addition to its key roles in promoting regeneration
of axons and neurites, C3 also regulates apoptosis through
interaction with p53NTR (Dubreuil et al., 2003). Given the wide
range of cellular functions of C3 transferase in promoting CNS
regeneration, combinatorial therapies of C3 transferase and other
neuroprotective drugs may provide additive effect (McKerracher
and Guertin, 2013). Although the significance of C3 transferase
in experimental models of TBI remains to be determined, it
stands to believe that the beneficial effects observed in spine
injuries are also applicable to TBI given the similarities between
these two forms of CNS trauma.

Surmounting Glial Scar
Recent findings suggest that glial scar not only acts as a
physical barrier to impede axon regeneration, the complex
cocktail of inhibitory molecules therein such as CSPGs, tenascins
and semaphorins also represent a non-permissive milieu for
axonal growth (Fawcett, 2006). Significant upregulation of
CSPGs like neurocan, phosphacan, versican and NG2 in glial
scar contributes to the failure of axon regeneration following
CNS injury. Administration of the CSPG-degrading enzyme
chondrotinase ABC reduces the level of CSPGs and cavitation
at the lesion site within 24 h (Lin et al., 2008). In vivo studies
of SCI have confirmed the effect of chondrotinase ABC in
the promotion of sprouting and outgrowth of injured axons
and the ensuing re-innervation (Bradbury et al., 2002; Yick
et al., 2003; Chau et al., 2004; Barritt et al., 2006). Importantly,
the improvement in axonal pathology is associated with an
amelioration of neurological deficits (Bradbury et al., 2002;
Barritt et al., 2006). Overexpression of chondrotinase ABC in
transgenic mice has also shown regeneration of axon through
astrocytic scar (Cafferty et al., 2007). The inhibitory molecules
in glial scar, therefore, represent promising targets to promote
regeneration in TBI.
Stem Cell Therapies
Loss of neurons and glia are major hallmarks in severed CNS.
Replacement of these cells, therefore, represents a valid approach
of therapy. Marrow stromal cells are capable of differentiating
into multiple cell lineages including glia and neurons both
in vitro and in vivo (Sanchez-Ramos et al., 2000; Lu et al.,
2001). Rat or human bone marrow stromal cells intravenously
administered into rats after TBI were found to migrate into
the lesioned cortex and displayed an astrocytic and neuronal
phenotype, as identified by glial (GFAP) and neuronal (NeuN)
markers, respectively (Lu et al., 2001; Mahmood et al., 2004b).
Marrow stromal cells also play an important role in inducing
neurogenesis after TBI, as indicated by the presence of new
BrdU+ proliferating cells in the contusion, subventricular zone
and hippocampus (Mahmood et al., 2004b). These histological
findings correlated with a sustained improvement of neurological
and motor functions (Lu et al., 2001; Mahmood et al., 2004b).
Similarly, mesenchymal stem cells also exhibit beneficial effects

DNA Vaccine Against Myelin-Derived Axonal Growth
Inhibitors
Myelin-associated axonal growth inhibitors exposed in severed
axons are known to cause growth cone collapse and impede

Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

11

November 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 528

Ng and Lee

Pathophysiology and Therapy of Traumatic Brain Injuries

in both in vitro and in vivo TBI studies. Mesenchymal stem
cells isolated from mice promote proliferation and induce GFAP
expression in neural stem cell culture. Injection of mesenchymal
stem cells into acute TBI model reduces the expression of various
pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines such as IL-1β, IL-6,
TNF-α, CCL2, CCL11 and CXCL (Galindo et al., 2011). In
addition to anti-inflammatory effect, mesenchymal stem cells
attenuate neuronal loss in the hippocampus and cortex through a
reduction of caspase-3 activation and an increase in AKT activity
(Kim et al., 2009). Human mesenchymal stem cells have also been
shown to improve neurological function in TBI rats 2 weeks after
transplantation (Kim et al., 2009).
Stem cells from human are used in many studies due to
the capability to release neurotrophic factors such as NGF
and BDNF, which are known for their neuroprotective effects.
Transplantation of human fetal stem cells, for instance, leads
to sustained improvement in motor function and memory,
which is associated with a reduction in lesion volume and
neuronal loss at the lesion site (Riess et al., 2002; Skardelly
et al., 2011). These can also be attributed to the promotion of
angiogenesis and inhibition of activated microglia post-injury
(Skardelly et al., 2011). Importantly, fetal stem cells were found to
differentiate into neurons and astrocytes in injured hippocampus
and cortex with the release of glial-derived neurotrophic factor
(Riess et al., 2002; Gao et al., 2006). A small scale phase I
clinical trial on autologous marrow stromal cell transplantation
in young TBI patients has shown no adverse effects though
only modest neurological improvement was found (Cox et al.,
2011). Tian et al. (2013) conducted a phase I/II trial in patients
with sub-acute phase of TBI by intrathecal administration of
autologous bone marrow-derived mononuclear cells. While no
major complications were observed, improvement in function
was only seen in less than half of the patients with persistent
vegetative state and motor disorder (Tian et al., 2013). Expansion
of this study by recruiting more subjects will provide insight into
the feasibility of this approach.

replacement of severed neurons but also through the promotion
of survival and proliferation of resident cells via paracrine release
of bioactive molecules or direct cell-cell interaction (Chen et al.,
2002; Mahmood et al., 2004a). In this regard, exosome released
from MSCs has emerged as promising candidate that mediates
these beneficial effects. Systemic administration of cell-free
exosomes released by MSCs was found to promote restoration
of cognitive and sensorimotor functions in rat TBI model,
concomitant with neurovascular remodeling, neurogenesis in
the dentate gyrus and reduced neuroinflammation (Zhang
et al., 2015). Intravenous infusion of exosomes isolated from
MSCs can also suppress neuroinflammation, improve cognitive
and spatial learning functions in mouse after TBI (Kim
et al., 2016). Exosomes are small membrane vesicles with
diameter ranging from 50 to 200 nm (Trams et al., 1981;
Schneider and Simons, 2013). They carry proteins, RNAs,
microRNAs, lipids, and exert intercellular signaling function
by transferring these cargoes to other cells via ligand-receptor
binding and internalization (Taylor and Gercel-Taylor, 2014).
For instance, exosomes released from injured sensory neurons
are enriched in miR-21, a non-coding microRNA that upon
phagocytosed by macrophages promotes pro-inflammatory
responses. Administration of antagomir against miR-21 reduces
neuropathic hypersensitivity and recruitment of inflammatory
macrophages to the injury site (Simeoli et al., 2017). By contrast,
miR-21 in exosomes released from neurons formerly primed
by injured mouse brain extracts have recently been shown to
inhibit the activity of neuronal autophagy (Li et al., 2019).
Furthermore, exosomes enriched in miR-17–92 cluster have been
shown to promote neurogenesis, oligodendrogenesis, and axonal
outgrowth in severed CNS due to stroke (Xin et al., 2017).
miR-132 carried by exosomes acts as an intercellular signal
to regulate brain vascular integrity (Xu et al., 2017). In short,
exosomes derived from neurons and glial cells can regulate gene
expression and miRNA activities in an autocrine manner, which
in general mediate neuroprotection and neurorestorative effects
by promoting neurogenesis, reducing inflammation, increasing
angiogenesis and tissue remodeling.

Extracellular Vesicles and miRNAs
While stem cell therapies have demonstrated promising effects in
promoting regeneration in TBI, these treatments are associated
with various complications. The use of fetal embryonic stem cells
undoubtedly involves legal and ethical issues. Multipotency of
stem cells poses the risk of unregulated growth and tumorigenesis
(Jeong et al., 2011). Administration of these cells into the
body may also occlude microvasculature and trigger immune
responses (Furlani et al., 2009). Besides, it is laborious to isolate,
prepare and preserve viability of stem cells. As stated above,
mesenchymal stem cells have recently emerged as promising
candidates for TBI treatment. MSCs administered into the
body were found to preferentially migrate to damaged tissue
sites where they differentiate into neurons and glial cells,
reducing expression of axon outgrowth inhibitory molecules,
suppressing neuroinflammation and promoting the release of
growth factors, with concomitant substantial improvement
in neurological functions (Das et al., 2019). Interestingly,
accumulating evidence suggests that the protective effect of
MSCs may not be entirely due to their differentiation and

Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

DELIVERY OF THERAPEUTIC AGENTS TO
THE BRAIN
Overcoming Physiological Barriers
Physiological barriers such as the BBB and the blood-CSF barrier,
maintained by endothelial cells separating the CNS from the
peripheral circulation, are of great importance in protecting the
brain. These interfaces tightly regulate the transmigration of
small molecules into the CNS, hence posing challenges to drug
delivery in TBI treatment. It should be noted, however, that
BBB intactness is often compromised as a direct consequence of
TBI. While BBB dysfunction contributes greatly to the prolonged
secondary damage after TBI, it also allows therapeutic proteins
or peptides administered through other entry routes such as
intranasal delivery to cross the tight endothelial junctions and
reach the injury site (Habgood et al., 2007; Lotocki et al.,
2009; Ligade et al., 2010). In experimental TBIs, intraventricular
administration of therapeutic agents is a common and feasible

12

November 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 528

Ng and Lee

Pathophysiology and Therapy of Traumatic Brain Injuries

confirmed to be compatible with the nervous system. Depending
on the application, PLGA polymers can be prepared in different
dosage forms by using specific techniques (Anderson and
Shive, 1997; Soppimath et al., 2001). The emulsification solvent
evaporation method, for instance is widely used in fabricating
PLGA microspheres (Jain, 2000). Recently, the electrospinning
technique has been developed to produce nanofibers (Li et al.,
2002). Both of these methodologies allow high efficiency of drug
incorporation during the production process. Tan et al. (2007)
have demonstrated >80% loading efficiency in the encapsulation
of the recombinant protein Tat-C3 transferase, a potent RhoA
inhibitor that freely enters cells, in PLGA microspheres using
the water-in-oil-in-water emulsification method (Tan et al.,
2007). Alternatively, drugs can be adsorbed onto pre-fabricated
polymer particles.
Drug release from PLGA-based depot involves gradual
degradation of the polymer when hydrogen and covalent bonds
are hydrolyzed by water to form lactic and glycolic acids,
which can be metabolized by Krebs cycle in the body (Park,
1995). Manipulating the ratio of lactide to glycolide monomers
in the polymer allows modulation of the degradation profile,
hence the rate of drug release. A higher glycolide content,
for instance, correlates with faster hydrolysis and drug release.
Other contributing factors include physico-chemical properties
of the polymer such as solubility, porosity and molecular
weight (Anderson and Shive, 1997). In addition, polymers that
are end-capped with esters are more resistant to hydrolytic
degradation than those with free carboxylic acid. In the in vitro
study by Tan et al. (2007), PLGA polymers carrying uncapped
(free carboxyl) and capped (lauryl ester) end groups were blended
at various ratios to determine the optimal release profile for
the encapsulated recombinant protein Tat-C3. Release kinetics
analysis revealed that the formulation of 30% capped-70%
uncapped PLGA allowed a mild initial burst while maintaining
constant rate of protein release over a period of 28 days.
The protein release characteristics were a result of balanced
degradation rate of capped and uncapped PLGA, as well as the
concomitant gradual increase in porosity of the microspheres
due to formation of new internal pores within existing pores as
revealed by scanning electron microscopy (Tan et al., 2007).
Since in vivo application of biopolymer-based drug delivery
systems involves direct and prolonged contact with tissues, one
of the major concerns is their biocompatibility, which can be
determined according to the inflammatory responses induced
after implantation into different sites of the brain, such as the
striatum, lateral ventricles, frontal lobe and substantia nigra
(Fournier et al., 2003; Lampe et al., 2011). While PLGA polymers
are generally known to be biocompatible, some studies have
reported that they induce acute inflammatory responses, as
detected by immunohistochemical staining of astrocytes though
it could be a non-specific consequence of mechanical trauma
(Emerich et al., 1999; Lampe et al., 2011). A known issue of PLGA
polymers is their adverse effects on the stability of encapsulated
proteins or peptides. Loss of protein activity or integrity during
the controlled released process can be attributed to protein
adsorption to the polymer, or to a greater extent protein
denaturation due to acidification when PLGA polymers break

method to overcome these barriers by direct delivery into the
CSF (Temsamani et al., 2000). In clinical management of TBI,
surgical intervention is often required to relieve intracranial
pressure and edema, which also provides an opportunity for
direct drug delivery.

Sustained and Controlled Drug Delivery via
Osmotic Pumps
While the therapeutic agents discussed above demonstrate
various neuroprotective effects in both in vitro and in vivo
studies of TBI, the long-lasting adverse effects associated with
secondary brain damage calls for the development of delivery
systems that allow constant, sustained, and controlled release
of these candidate therapeutics to exert their full potential in
promoting recovery from TBI. In experimental models of TBI in
rats, osmotic mini-pumps have been successfully used to deliver
NGF and S100B neurotrophic protein into lateral ventricles in
the brain at a constant rate, which results in promotion of
cognitive functions (Dixon et al., 1997; Kleindienst et al., 2004).
These mini-pumps are implantable and require no external
power as they are driven by the pressure developed from osmotic
difference between osmolytes in the pump and interstitial fluid
of the body. The capability to continuously infuse drugs at a rate
of microliters per hour from 1 day to a month renders osmotic
mini-pump a powerful tool to evaluate the in vivo efficacy and
toxicity of agents that have a short half-life, like proteins and
peptides, though subcutaneous implantation of the pump is
needed to minimize infection and allow unrestrained movement
of the subject.

Nanocarriers
In addition to osmotic pumps, encapsulation of drugs in
micro- or nano- particles is emerging as promising ways
to allow sustained and controlled delivery of therapeutics in
TBI research. Both natural and synthetic polymers have been
successfully used as drug depots, which share common features
of being biocompatible, biodegradable, generally inert, as well
as capable of attaching to or encapsulating small molecules
and proteins (Orive et al., 2009). While biopolymer-based drug
delivery systems have been applied in many tissues and organs,
reports of their use in TBI treatment is limited (Heile and
Brinker, 2011; Guan et al., 2013; Khalin et al., 2016). Turkoglu
et al. (2010) have administered cyclosporine A-loaded natural
chitosan microspheres into brain ventricles after TBI induction
in rats. While it successfully reduced mitochondrial damage and
lowered lipid peroxidation, the beneficial effect was, in fact,
comparable to that of the control group where cyclosporine
A alone was intraperitoneally injected (Turkoglu et al., 2010).
This could have been due to the sub-optimal formulations
of chitosan microspheres, dosage of the drug and route of
administration. Other natural biopolymers commonly used for
drug encapsulation include alginate and gelatin (Orive et al.,
2009). One of the most popular synthetic biopolymers used
as nanocarriers for drug delivery purposes is the family of
poly (D,L-lactide-co-glycolide; PLGA), polylactic acid (PLA) and
polyglycolic acid (PGA). Notably, these polymers are approved
by the Food and Drug Administration in the US and are

Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

13

November 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 528

Ng and Lee

Pathophysiology and Therapy of Traumatic Brain Injuries

neurons, microglia, and oligodendrocytes in the brain (AlvarezErviti et al., 2011). Since exosomes are stable and can preserve
the conformation and bioactivity of proteins and nucleic acids,
they serve as ideal natural vehicles for targeted drug delivery
to the CNS.

down to lactic and glycolic acids. The stability of encapsulated
bioactive agents can be improved by incorporating pH modifiers
such as calcium carbonate or magnesium hydroxide during the
encapsulation process (Houchin and Topp, 2008). Similarly,
proton scavengers/sponge that are basic amines, such as 1–8bis-(dimethylamino)naphthalene can be added as excipients
(Houchin et al., 2007). Furthermore, recent studies have reported
inactivation of encapsulated peptides by an acylation reaction
of their reactive amines with the ester bonds of PLGA (Domb
et al., 1994). PEGylation of the peptide prior to encapsulation
can prevent these undesirable covalent interactions with PLGA
(Na and DeLuca, 2005). The resulting PEGylated peptides also
exhibit reduced immunogenicity.

Cell Penetrating Peptides to Facilitate Cell
Entry of Drugs
While the issues of sustained and controlled delivery of
drugs can be resolved by various approaches described above,
therapeutic agents such as peptides or proteins directed against
intracellular targets often encounter difficulties in gaining access
into cells because of their low membrane permeability. To
improve the efficiency of cell entry, these proteins can be
fused to a peculiar class of proteins known as cell penetrating
proteins (CPPs), which are capable of traversing biological
membranes and act as cellular delivery vehicles (Koren and
Torchilin, 2012; Guidotti et al., 2017). CPPs, also commonly
known as protein transduction domains, are small amphipathic
peptides that contain mainly positively charged amino acids
like arginine and lysine. Different unique properties and nature
of these CPPs allow non-invasive internalization of conjugated
peptides or small molecules through the plasma membrane
(Gupta et al., 2005; Foged and Nielsen, 2008). Despite extensive
characterizations of these CPPs, the exact mechanism through
which they permeate the plasma membrane is still controversial
and remains to be determined. Multiple mechanisms of cellular
internalization have been proposed in CPPs, and the efficiency of
translocation appears to be dependent on the nature of individual
CPP (Koren and Torchilin, 2012). For instance, CPPs conjugated
with target peptides can directly translocate across lipid bilayer
through the formation of pores at the membrane. Alternatively,
CPP-mediated internalization can be via energy-dependent
endocytosis. Lastly, the CPP-cargo fusion proteins can form
vesicles and inverted micelles which are capable of destabilizing
cell membrane, thus releasing the conjugated proteins into cell.
Specific cationic CPPs can bind to cell surface proteoglycans
(heparin sulfates) for internalization of the cargo (Foged and
Nielsen, 2008; Sebbage, 2009). Both in vitro and in vivo
studies of CNS injuries have demonstrated successful cellular
translocation of different proteins by conjugating to various
CPPs, including trans-activating transcription (Tat) factor,
penetratin, membrane translocating sequences, transportan and
Pep-1 (Lindgren et al., 2000). Nonetheless, the concerns about
cytotoxicity and specificity of these CPPs remain controversial.
While majority of studies have indicated a low level of toxicity of
CPPs at low concentrations, high cytotoxicity has been reported
in rat neuronal cultures (Antoniou and Borsello, 2010). Further
validation of the biocompatibility of CPPs is therefore required.

Extracellular Vesicles for Drug Delivery
Exosomes are lipid bilayer membrane vesicles released by almost
all cell types. Cargoes carries by exosomes are mainly molecules
derived from endosomes, ranging from mRNAs, microRNAs,
proteins to lipids, which vary based on cell origin (Chopp and
Zhang, 2015). Recently, exosomes derived from MSCs have
received attention due to their effect in promoting functional
recovery in animal models of TBIs (Zhang et al., 2015).
Although the underlying mechanism is not fully understood,
miRNAs transferred from exosomes seemingly play a pivotal
role in mediating the beneficial effect (Taylor and GercelTaylor, 2013). Importantly, the unique property of exosomes as
natural lipid-based nanovesicles that show high biocompatibility,
low immunogenicity, efficient permeability across BBB and
cell membrane renders them promising candidates to be
developed as novel drug delivery system for CNS (Xiong
et al., 2017). Accumulating evidence suggests that exosomes
transverse through membranes via ligand-receptor binding and
internalization. Macrophage exosomes, for instance, express
the integrin lymphocyte function-associated antigen 1 (LFA1) on surface, which interacts with the highly upregulated
intracellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) on endothelial
cells of BBB in inflamed brain. Intravenous administration
of macrophage exosomes pre-loaded with BDNF has been
shown to successfully deliver the protein to the brain (Yuan
et al., 2017). Exosomes derived from choroid plexus epithelial
cells express folate receptor α (FRα), which interacts with
ependymal cells and mediates transverse through the CSF-brain
barrier before being taken up by astrocytes and neurons in
the brain (Grapp et al., 2013). These observations suggest that
receptor-mediated transcytosis of exosomes can be a promising
way for drug delivery to the CNS. Apart from using natural
exosomes which intrinsically expressing protein or lipid ligands
that bind to intended recipient cells, exosomes can also be
engineered to target particular cell types or tissues by ectopic
expression of specific ligands or homing peptides. AlvarezErviti et al. (2011) forced expressed a fusion protein between
the exosomal membrane protein Lamp2b and the neuronspecific RVG peptide in exosomes isolated from dendritic cells.
Purified exosomes were then loaded with siRNA directed against
GAPDH and systemically introduced into mice via intravenous
injection. Strikingly, exosome-mediated delivery of these siRNAs
was found to successfully downregulate the target mRNA in

Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

DISCUSSION
Research in traumatic injuries in the CNS has significantly
expanded our understanding of the underlying pathophysiology
and molecular mechanisms. While primary injuries in TBI are
largely irreversible, the ensuing secondary damages that develop
and progress over months to years are amenable to therapeutical

14

November 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 528

Ng and Lee

Pathophysiology and Therapy of Traumatic Brain Injuries

interventions. Since this delayed phase of injury involves a
plethora of events, which include excitotoxicity, apoptotic cell
death, inhibition of axonal regeneration, neuroinflammation and
oxidative stress, the devise of efficacious therapeutic strategies
will need to target multiple mechanisms over an extended period.
The availability of depot systems for regulated and sustained
delivery of therapeutic agents that are capable of entering cells
by permeating the plasma membrane will apparently allow
further improvement of the bioavailability of existing drugs.
More importantly, it will offer the opportunity to explore
the therapeutic potential of novel agents against druggable
targets. In fact, this therapeutic approach has been applied
in the treatment of many neurodegenerative disorders such
as Alzheimer’s disease, Huntington’s disease and Parkinson’s
disease (Popovic and Brundin, 2006; Saraiva et al., 2016). While
the feasibility of this strategy in the management of TBI has yet
to be established, it seems promising due to the slow progression
of events during secondary damages in TBI, which require
continuous availability of therapeutic agents in bioactive form at

non-cytotoxic concentration. TBI has become a major health and
socioeconomic problem throughout the world, which imposes
a significant healthcare burden to modern societies that call for
more effective therapeutic means. It also represents a valid issue
in defense science because of a drastic increase in subtle CNS
injuries among the military when they are better protected from
fatality by modern technologies.

REFERENCES

Asher, R. A., Morgenstern, D. A., Shearer, M. C., Adcock, K. H., Pesheva, P.,
and Fawcett, J. W. (2002). Versican is upregulated in CNS injury and
is a product of oligodendrocyte lineage cells. J. Neurosci. 22, 2225–2236.
doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.22-06-02225.2002
Au, A. K., Aneja, R. K., Bayir, H., Bell, M. J., Janesko-Feldman, K., Kochanek, P. M.,
et al. (2017). Autophagy biomarkers beclin 1 and p62 are increased in
cerebrospinal fluid after traumatic brain injury. Neurocrit. Care 26, 348–355.
doi: 10.1007/s12028-016-0351-x
Bailey, I., Bell, A., Gray, J., Gullan, R., Heiskanan, O., Marks, P. V., et al. (1991). A
trial of the effect of nimodipine on outcome after head injury. Acta Neurochir.
110, 97–105. doi: 10.1007/bf01400674
Bales, J. W., Ma, X., Yan, H. Q., Jenkins, L. W., and Dixon, C. E. (2009). Expression
of protein phosphatase 2B (calcineurin) subunit a isoforms in rat hippocampus
after traumatic brain injury. J. Neurotrauma 27, 109–120. doi: 10.1089/neu.
2009.1072
Barritt, A. W., Davies, M., Marchand, F., Hartley, R., Grist, J., Yip, P., et al. (2006).
Chondroitinase ABC promotes sprouting of intact and injured spinal systems
after spinal cord injury. J. Neurosci. 26, 10856–10867. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.
2980-06.2006
Bazarian, J. J., Cernak, I., Noble-Haeusslein, L., Potolicchio, S., and Temkin, N.
(2009). Long-term neurologic outcomes after traumatic brain injury.
J. Head Trauma Rehabil. 24, 439–451. doi: 10.1097/htr.0b013e3181c
15600
Beer, R., Franz, G., Srinivasan, A., Hayes, R. L., Pike, B. R., Newcomb, J. K., et al.
(2000). Temporal profile and cell subtype distribution of activated caspase-3
following experimental traumatic brain injury. J. Neurochem. 75, 1264–1273.
doi: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.2000.0751264.x
Berman, R. F., Verweij, B. H., and Muizelaar, J. P. (2000). Neurobehavioral
protection by the neuronal calcium channel blocker Ziconotide in a
model of traumatic diffuse brain injury in rats. J. Neurosurg. 93, 821–828.
doi: 10.3171/jns.2000.93.5.0821
Black, K. L., Hanks, R. A., Wood, D. L., Zafonte, R. D., Cullen, N., Cifu, D. X.,
et al. (2002). Blunt versus penetrating violent traumatic brain injury:
frequency and factors associated with secondary conditions and complications.
J. Head Trauma Rehabil. 17, 489–496. doi: 10.1097/00001199-20021200000001
Blaha, G. R., Raghupathi, R., Saatman, K. E., and Mcintosh, T. K. (2000). Brainderived neurotrophic factor administration after traumatic brain injury in the
rat does not protect against behavioral of histological deficits. Neuroscience 99,
483–493. doi: 10.1016/s0306-4522(00)00214-1
Boato, F., Hendrix, S., Huelsenbeck, S. C., Hofmann, F., Grosse, G., Djalali, S., et al.
(2010). C3 peptide enhances recovery from spinal cord injury by improved
regenerative growth of descending fiber tracts. J. Cell Sci. 123, 1652–1662.
doi: 10.1242/jcs.066050

AUTHOR CONTIBUTIONS
All authors listed have made a substantial, direct and intellectual
contribution to the work, and approved it for publication.

FUNDING
This work was supported by the National Medical Research
Council, Singapore, Fundamental Research Grant Scheme,
Ministry of Education, and the eScienceFund, Ministry of
Science, Technology and Innovation, Malaysia.

Ahn, M. J., Sherwood, E. R., Prough, D. S., Lin, C. Y., and Dewitt, D. S. (2004).
The effects of traumatic brain injury on cerebral blood flow and brain tissue
nitric oxide levels and cytokine expression. J. Neurotrauma 10, 1431–1442.
doi: 10.1089/neu.2004.21.1431
Ai, J., Liu, E., Wang, J., Chen, Y., Yu, J., and Baker, A. J. (2007). Calpain
inhibitor MDL-28170 reduces the functional and structural deterioration of
corpus callosum following fluid percussion injury. J. Neurotrauma 24, 960–978.
doi: 10.1089/neu.2006.0224
Aktories, K., Wilde, C., and Vogelsgesang, M. (2005). Rho-modifying C3-like
ADP-ribosyltransferases. Rev. Physiol. Biochem. Pharmacol. 152, 1–22.
doi: 10.1007/s10254-004-0034-4
Alessandri, B., Rice, A. C., Levasseur, J., Deford, M., Hamm, R. J., and
Bullock, M. R. (2002). Cyclosporin A improves brain tissue oxygen
consumption and learning/memory performance after lateral fluid percussion
injury in rats. J. Neurotrauma 19, 829–841. doi: 10.1089/08977150260
190429
Alvarez-Erviti, L., Seow, Y., Yin, H., Betts, C., Lakhal, S., and Wood, M. J.
(2011). Delivery of siRNA to the mouse brain by systemic injection of targeted
exosomes. Nat. Biotechnol. 29, 341–345. doi: 10.1038/nbt.1807
Anderson, J. M., and Shive, M. S. (1997). Biodegradation and biocompatibility
of PLA and PLGA microspheres. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 28, 5–24.
doi: 10.1016/s0169-409x(97)00048-3
Andriessen, T. M., Jacobs, B., and Vos, P. E. (2010). Clinical characteristics and
pathophysiological mechanisms of focal and diffuse traumatic brain injury.
J. Cell. Mol. Med. 14, 2381–2392. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2010.01164.x
Ansari, M. A., Roberts, K. N., and Scheff, S. W. (2008a). Oxidative stress and
modification of synaptic proteins in hippocampus after traumatic brain injury.
Free Radic. Biol. Med. 45, 443–452. doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2008.04.038
Ansari, M. A., Roberts, K. N., and Scheff, S. W. (2008b). A time course of
contusion-induced oxidative stress and synaptic proteins in cortex in a rat
model of TBI. J. Neurotrauma 25, 513–526. doi: 10.1089/neu.2007.0451
Antoniou, X., and Borsello, T. (2010). Cell permeable peptides: a promising tool
to deliver neuroprotective agents in the brain. Pharmaceuticals 3, 379–392.
doi: 10.3390/ph3020379
Asher, R. A., Morgenstern, D. A., Fidler, P. S., Adcock, K. H., Oohira, A.,
Braistead, J. E., et al. (2000). Neurocan is upregulated in injured brain and in
cytokine-treated astrocytes. J. Neurosci. 20, 2427–2438. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.
20-07-02427.2000
Asher, R. A., Morgenstern, D. A., Moon, L. D. F., Fawcett, J. W., and Castellano
Lopez, B. M. N.-S. (2001). Chondroitin sulphate proteoglycans: inhibitory
components of the glial scar. Prog. Brain Res. 132, 611–619. doi: 10.1016/s00796123(01)32106-4

Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

15

November 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 528

Ng and Lee

Pathophysiology and Therapy of Traumatic Brain Injuries

Brabeck, C., Beschorner, R., Conrad, S., Mittelbronn, M., Bekure, K.,
Meyermann, R., et al. (2004). Lesional expression of RhoA and RhoB
following traumatic brain injury in humans. J. Neurotrauma 21, 697–706.
doi: 10.1089/0897715041269597
Bradbury, E. J., Moon, L. D. F., Popat, R. J., King, V. R., Bennett, G. S., Patel, P. N.,
et al. (2002). Chondroitinase ABC promotes functional recovery after spinal
cord injury. Nature 416, 636–640. doi: 10.1038/416636a
Brines, M. L., Ghezzi, P., Keenan, S., Agnello, D., De Lanerolle, N. C., Cerami, C.,
et al. (2000). Erythropoietin crosses the blood-brain barrier to protect against
experimental brain injury. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 97, 10526–10531.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.97.19.10526
Bruns, J.Jr., and Hauser, W. A. (2003). The epidemiology of traumatic brain injury:
a review. Epilepsia 44, 2–10. doi: 10.1046/j.1528-1157.44.s10.3.x
Brustovetsky, T., Bolshakov, A., and Brustovetsky, N. (2010). Calpain activation
and Na+/Ca2+ exchanger degradation occur downstream of calcium
deregulation in hippocampal neurons exposed to excitotoxic glutamate.
J. Neurosci. Res. 88, 1317–1328. doi: 10.1002/jnr.22295
Buki, A., Farkas, O., Doczi, T., and Povlishock, J. T. (2003). Preinjury
administration of the calpain inhibitor MDL-28170 attenuates traumatically
induced axonal injury. J. Neurotrauma 20, 261–268. doi: 10.1089/089771503
321532842
Büki, A., and Povlishock, J. T. (2006). All roads lead to disconnection? Traumatic
axonal injury revisited. Acta Neurochir. 148, 181–194. doi: 10.1007/s00701-0050674-4
Burke, M. A., Mobley, W. C., Cho, J., Wiegand, S. J., Lindsay, R. M., Mufson, E. J.,
et al. (1994). Loss of developing cholinergic basal forebrain neurons following
excitotoxic lesions of the hippocampus: rescue by neurotrophins. Exp. Neurol.
130, 178–195. doi: 10.1006/exnr.1994.1197
Buttram, S. D., Wisniewski, S. R., Jackson, E. K., Adelson, P. D., Feldman, K.,
Bayir, H., et al. (2007). Multiplex assessment of cytokine and chemokine levels
in cerebrospinal fluid following severe pediatric traumatic brain injury: effects
of moderate hypothermia. J. Neurotrauma 24, 1707–1718. doi: 10.1089/neu.
2007.0349
Bye, N., Carron, S., Han, X., Agyapomaa, D., Ng, S. Y., Yan, E., et al. (2011).
Neurogenesis and glial proliferation are stimulated following diffuse traumatic
brain injury in adult rats. J. Neurosci. Res. 89, 986–1000. doi: 10.1002/jnr.
22635
Bye, N., Habgood, M. D., Callaway, J. K., Malakooti, N., Potter, A., Kossmann, T.,
et al. (2007). Transient neuroprotection by minocycline following traumatic
brain injury is associated with attenuated microglial activation but no
changes in cell apoptosis or neutrophil infiltration. Exp. Neurol. 204, 220–233.
doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2006.10.013
Cafferty, W. B., Yang, S. H., Duffy, P. J., Li, S., and Strittmatter, S. M. (2007).
Functional axonal regeneration through astrocytic scar genetically modified
to digest chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans. J. Neurosci. 27, 2176–2185.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5176-06.2007
Carlos, T. M., Clark, R. S., Franicola-Higgins, D., Schiding, J. K., and
Kochanek, P. M. (1997). Expression of endothelial adhesion molecules and
recruitment of neutrophils after traumatic brain injury in rats. J. Leukoc. Biol.
61, 279–285. doi: 10.1002/jlb.61.3.279
Cernak, I., and Noble-Haeusslein, L. J. (2009). Traumatic brain injury: an overview
of pathobiology with emphasis on military populations. J. Cereb. Blood Flow
Metab. 30, 255–266. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2009.203
Chamoun, R., Suki, D., Gopinath, S. P., Goodman, J. C., and Robertson, C.
(2010). Role of extracellular glutamate measured by cerebral microdialysis in
severe traumatic brain injury. J. Neurosurg. 113, 564–570. doi: 10.3171/2009.
12.jns09689
Chau, C. H., Shum, D. K., Li, H., Pei, J., Lui, Y. Y., Wirthlin, L., et al.
(2004). Chondroitinase ABC enhances axonal regrowth through Schwann
cell-seeded guidance channels after spinal cord injury. FASEB J. 18, 194–196.
doi: 10.1096/fj.03-0196fje
Chaudhry, N., and Filbin, M. T. (2006). Myelin-associated inhibitory signaling and
strategies to overcome inhibition. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 27, 1096–1107.
doi: 10.1038/sj.jcbfm.9600407
Chen, X., Katakowski, M., Li, Y., Lu, D., Wang, L., Zhang, L., et al. (2002).
Human bone marrow stromal cell cultures conditioned by traumatic brain
tissue extracts: growth factor production. J. Neurosci. Res. 69, 687–691.
doi: 10.1002/jnr.10334

Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

Chen, G., Shi, J. X., Hang, C. H., Xie, W., Liu, J., and Liu, X. (2007). Inhibitory
effect on cerebral inflammatory agents that accompany traumatic brain injury
in a rat model: a potential neuroprotective mechanism of recombinant human
erythropoietin (rhEPO). Neurosci. Lett. 425, 177–182. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.
2007.08.022
Chen, X., Zhang, B., Chai, Y., Dong, B., Lei, P., Jiang, R., et al. (2011).
Methylprednisolone exacerbates acute critical illness-related corticosteroid
insufficiency associated with traumatic brain injury in rats. Brain Res. 1382,
298–307. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2011.01.045
Chen, X., Zhang, K., Yang, S., Dong, J., and Zhang, J. (2009). Glucocorticoids
aggravate retrograde memory deficiency associated with traumatic brain injury
in rats. J. Neurotrauma 26, 253–260. doi: 10.1089/neu.2007.0504
Cherian, L., Goodman, J. C., and Robertson, C. (2007). Neuroprotection with
erythropoietin administration following controlled cortical impact injury
in rats. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther. 322, 789–794. doi: 10.1124/jpet.107.
119628
Chiaretti, A., Antonelli, A., Mastrangelo, A., Pezzotti, P., Tortorolo, L., Tosi, F.,
et al. (2008). Interleukin-6 and nerve growth factor upregulation correlates
with improved outcome in children with severe traumatic brain injury.
J. Neurotrauma 25, 225–234. doi: 10.1089/neu.2007.0405
Chiaretti, A., Barone, G., Riccardi, R., Antonelli, A., Pezzotti, P., Genovese, O.,
et al. (2009). NGF, DCX and NSE upregulation correlates with severity and
outcome of head trauma in children. Neurology 72, 609–616. doi: 10.1212/01.
wnl.0000342462.51073.06
Choi, Y., Kim, H. S., Shin, K. Y., Kim, E. M., Kim, M., Kim, H. S., et al.
(2007). Minocycline attenuates neuronal cell death and improves cognitive
impairment in Alzheimer’s disease models. Neuropsychopharmacology 32,
2393–2404. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1301377
Chopp, M., and Zhang, Z. G. (2015). Emerging potential of exosomes and
noncoding microRNAs for the treatment of neurological injury/diseases.
Expert Opin. Emerg. Drugs 20, 523–526. doi: 10.1517/14728214.2015.10
61993
Clark, R. S., Bayir, H., Chu, C. T., Alber, S. M., Kochanek, P. M., and Watkins, S. C.
(2008). Autophagy is increased in mice after traumatic brain injury and is
detectable in human brain after trauma and critical illness. Autophagy 4, 88–90.
doi: 10.4161/auto.5173
Clark, R. S., Kochanek, P. M., Chen, M., Watkins, S. C., Marion, D. W., Chen, J.,
et al. (1999). Increases in Bcl-2 and cleavage of caspase-1 and caspase-3 in
human brain after head injury. FASEB J. 13, 813–821. doi: 10.1096/fasebj.
13.8.813
Clark, R. S., Kochanek, P. M., Watkins, S. C., Chen, M., Dixon, C. E.,
Seidberg, N. A., et al. (2000). Caspase-3 mediated neuronal death after
traumatic brain injury in rats. J. Neurochem. 74, 740–753. doi: 10.1046/j.14714159.2000.740740.x
Compton, J. S., Lee, T., Jones, N. R., Waddell, G., and Teddy, P. J. (1990). A double
blind placebo controlled trial of the calcium entry blocking drug, nicardipine,
in the treatment of vasospasm following severe head injury. Br. J. Neurosurg. 4,
9–15. doi: 10.3109/02688699009000676
Cox, C. S., Baumgartner, J. E., Harting, M. T., Worth, L. L., Walker, P. A.,
Shah, S. K., et al. (2011). Autologous bone marrow mononuclear cell therapy
for severe traumatic brain injury in children. Neurosurgery 68, 588–600.
doi: 10.1227/NEU.0b013e318207734c
Czeiter, E., Büki, A., Bukovics, P., Farkas, O., Pál, J., Kövesdi, E., et al.
(2009). Calpain inhibition reduces axolemmal leakage in traumatic
axonal injury. Molecules 14, 5115–5123. doi: 10.3390/molecules141
25115
Das, M., Mayilsamy, K., Mohapatra, S. S., and Mohapatra, S. (2019). Mesenchymal
stem cell therapy for the treatment of traumatic brain injury: progress and
prospects. Rev. Neurosci. doi: 10.1515/revneuro-2019-0002 [Epub ahead of
print].
Deng, Y., Thompson, B. M., Gao, X., and Hall, E. D. (2007). Temporal relationship
of peroxynitrite-induced oxidative damage, calpain-mediated cytoskeletal
degradation and neurodegeneration after traumatic brain injury. Exp. Neurol.
205, 154–165. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2007.01.023
Deshpande, L. S., Sun, D. A., Sombati, S., Baranova, A., Wilson, M. S., Attkisson, E.,
et al. (2008). Alterations in neuronal calcium levels are associated with cognitive
deficits after traumatic brain injury. Neurosci. Lett. 441, 115–119. doi: 10.1016/j.
neulet.2008.05.113

16

November 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 528

Ng and Lee

Pathophysiology and Therapy of Traumatic Brain Injuries

Dewan, M. C., Rattani, A., Gupta, S., Baticulon, R. E., Hung, Y. C.,
Punchak, M., et al. (2018). Estimating the global incidence of traumatic
brain injury. J. Neurosurg. 130, 1039–1408. doi: 10.3171/2017.10.JNS
17352
De Winter, F., Oudega, M., Lankhorst, A. J., Hamers, F. P., Blits, B.,
Ruitenberg, M. J., et al. (2002). Injury-induced class 3 semaphorin expression
in the rat spinal cord. Exp. Neurol. 175, 61–75. doi: 10.1006/exnr.
2002.7884
Dietrich, W. D., Alonso, O., Busto, R., and Finklestein, S. P. (1996). Posttreatment
with intravenous basic fibroblast growth factor reduces histopathological
damage following fluid-percussion brain injury in rats. J. Neurotrauma 13,
309–316. doi: 10.1089/neu.1996.13.309
Ding, K., Xu, J., Wang, H., Zhang, L., Wu, Y., and Li, T. (2015). Melatonin
protects the brain from apoptosis by enhancement of autophagy after traumatic
brain injury in mice. Neurochem. Int. 91, 46–54. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2015.
10.008
Diskin, T., Tal-Or, P., Erlich, S., Mizrachy, L., Alexandrovich, A., Shohami, E.,
et al. (2005). Closed head injury induces upregulation of Beclin 1 at the
cortical site of injury. J. Neurotrauma 22, 750–762. doi: 10.1089/neu.2005.
22.750
Dixon, C. E., Flinn, P., Bao, J., Venya, R., and Hayes, R. L. (1997). Nerve growth
factor attenuates cholinergic deficits following traumatic brain injury in rats.
Exp. Neurol. 146, 479–490. doi: 10.1006/exnr.1997.6557
Domb, A. J., Turovsky, L., and Nudelman, R. (1994). Chemical
interactions between drugs containing reactive amines with hydrolyzable
insoluble biopolymers in aqueous solutions. Pharm. Res. 11, 865–868.
doi: 10.1023/a:1018985909777
Dubreuil, C. I., Marklund, N., Deschamps, K., Mcintosh, T. K., and
Mckerracher, L. (2006). Activation of Rho after traumatic brain injury and
seizure in rats. Exp. Neurol. 198, 361–369. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2005.12.002
Dubreuil, C. I., Winton, M. J., and Mckerracher, L. (2003). Rho activation patterns
after spinal cord injury and the role of activated Rho in apoptosis in the central
nervous system. J. Cell Biol. 162, 233–243. doi: 10.1083/jcb.200301080
Emerich, D. F., Tracy, M. A., Ward, K. L., Figueiredo, M., Qian, R.,
Henschel, C., et al. (1999). Biocompatibility of poly (DL-lactide-coglycolide) microspheres implanted into the brain. Cell Transplant. 8, 47–58.
doi: 10.1177/096368979900800114
Erlich, S., Alexandrovich, A., Shohami, E., and Pinkas-Kramarski, R. (2007).
Rapamycin is a neuroprotective treatment for traumatic brain injury.
Neurobiol. Dis. 26, 86–93. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2006.12.003
Eshhar, N., Striem, S., Kohen, R., Tirosh, O., and Biegon, A. (1995).
Neuroprotective and antioxidant activities of HU-211, a novel NMDA
receptor antagonist. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 283, 19–29. doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(95)
00271-l
Faden, A., Demediuk, P., Panter, S., and Vink, R. (1989). The role of excitatory
amino acids and NMDA receptors in traumatic brain injury. Science 244,
798–800. doi: 10.1126/science.2567056
Fawcett, J. W. (2006). Overcoming inhibition in the damaged spinal cord.
J. Neurotrauma 23, 371–383. doi: 10.1089/neu.2006.23.371
Fawcett, J. W., and Asher, R. A. (1999). The glial scar and central nervous
system repair. Brain Res. Bull. 49, 377–391. doi: 10.1016/s0361-9230(99)
00072-6
Fehlings, M., Theodore, N., Harrop, J., Maurais, G., Kuntz, C., Shaffrey, C., et al.
(2011). A phase I/IIa clinical trial of a recombinant Rho protein antagonist
in acute spinal cord injury. J. Neurotrauma 28, 787–796. doi: 10.1089/neu.
2011.1765
Filipovic, R., and Zecevic, N. (2008). Neuroprotective role of minocycline in
co-cultures of human fetal neurons and microglia. Exp. Neurol. 211, 41–51.
doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2007.12.024
Finkelstein, E., Corso, P. S., and Miller, T. R. (2006). The Incidence and Economic
Burden of Injuries in the United States. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Foged, C., and Nielsen, H. M. (2008). Cell-penetrating peptides for drug
delivery across membrane barriers. Expert Opin. Drug Deliv. 5, 105–117.
doi: 10.1517/17425247.5.1.105
Folkerts, M. M., Parks, E. A., Dedman, J. R., Kaetzel, M. A., Lyeth, B. G.,
and Berman, R. F. (2007). Phosphorylation of calcium calmodulin-dependent
protein kinase II following lateral fluid percussion brain injury in rats.
J. Neurotrauma 24, 638–650. doi: 10.1089/neu.2006.0188

Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

Follett, P. L., Rosenberg, P. A., Volpe, J. J., and Jensen, F. E. (2000). NBQX
attenuates excitotoxic injury in developing white matter. J. Neurosci. 20,
9235–9241. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.20-24-09235.2000
Fournier, E., Passirani, C., Montero-Menei, C. N., and Benoit, J. P. (2003).
Biocompatibility of implantable synthetic polymeric drug carriers: focus
on brain biocompatibility. Biomaterials 24, 3311–3331. doi: 10.1016/s01429612(03)00161-3
Frugier, T., Morganti-Kossmann, M. C., O’Reilly, D., and Mclean, C. A. (2009).
in situ detection of inflammatory mediators in post mortem human brain tissue
after traumatic injury. J. Neurotrauma 27, 497–507. doi: 10.1089/neu.2009.1120
Fujitani, Y., Hibi, M., Fukada, T., Takahashi-Tezuka, M., Yoshida, H.,
Yamaguchi, T., et al. (1997). An alternative pathway for STAT activation that
is mediated by the direct interaction between JAK and STAT. Oncogene 14,
751–761. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1200907
Furlani, D., Ugurlucan, M., Ong, L., Bieback, K., Pittermann, E., Westien, I.,
et al. (2009). Is the intravascular administration of mesenchymal stem cells
safe? Mesenchymal stem cells and intravital microscopy. Microvasc. Res. 77,
370–376. doi: 10.1016/j.mvr.2009.02.001
Galindo, L. T., Filippo, T. R. M., Semedo, P., Ariza, C. B., Moreira, C. M.,
Camara, N. O. S., et al. (2011). Mesenchymal stem cell therapy modulates the
inflammatory response in experimental traumatic brain injury. Neurol. Res. Int.
2011:564089. doi: 10.1155/2011/564089
Gao, J., Prough, D. S., Mcadoo, D. J., Grady, J. J., Parsley, M. O., Ma, L., et al.
(2006). Transplantation of primed human fetal neural stem cells improves
cognitive function in rats after traumatic brain injury. Exp. Neurol. 201,
281–292. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2006.04.039
Gao, Y., Zhuang, Z., Gao, S., Li, X., Zhang, Z., Ye, Z., et al. (2017).
Tetrahydrocurcumin reduces oxidative stress-induced apoptosis via the
mitochondrial apoptotic pathway by modulating autophagy in rats after
traumatic brain injury. Am. J. Transl. Res. 9, 887–899.
Garrido-Mesa, N., Zarzuelo, A., and Galvez, J. (2013). Minocycline: far beyond an
antibiotic. Br. J. Pharmacol. 169, 337–352. doi: 10.1111/bph.12139
Gentleman, S. M., Leclercq, P. D., Moyes, L., Graham, D. I., Smith, C.,
Griffin, W. S. T., et al. (2004). Long-term intracerebral inflammatory response
after traumatic brain injury. Forensic Sci. Int. 146, 97–104. doi: 10.1016/j.
forsciint.2004.06.027
Girouard, H., Wang, G., Gallo, E. F., Anrather, J., Zhou, P., Pickel, V. M., et al.
(2009). NMDA receptor activation increases free radical production through
nitric oxide and NOX2. J. Neurosci. 29, 2545–2552. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.
0133-09.2009
Goda, M., Isono, M., Fujiki, M., and Kobayashi, H. (2002). Both MK801 and
NBQX reduce the neuronal damage after impact-acceleration brain injury.
J. Neurotrauma 19, 1445–1456. doi: 10.1089/089771502320914679
Goodman, J. C., Van, M., Gopinath, S. P., and Robertson, C. S. (2009). Proinflammatory and pro-apoptotic elements of the neuroinflammatory response
are activated in traumatic brain injury. Acta Neurochir. Suppl. 102, 437–439.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-211-85578-2_85
Grady, M. S., Charleston, J. S., Maris, D., Witgen, B. M., and Lifshitz, J.
(2003). Neuronal and glial cell number in the hippocampus after experimental
traumatic brain injury: analysis by stereological estimation. J. Neurotrauma 20,
929–941. doi: 10.1089/089771503770195786
Grapp, M., Wrede, A., Schweizer, M., Huwel, S., Galla, H. J., Snaidero, N., et al.
(2013). Choroid plexus transcytosis and exosome shuttling deliver folate into
brain parenchyma. Nat. Commun. 4:2123. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3123
Guan, J., Zhu, Z., Zhao, R. C., Xiao, Z., Wu, C., Han, Q., et al. (2013).
Transplantation of human mesenchymal stem cells loaded on collagen scaffolds
for the treatment of traumatic brain injury in rats. Biomaterials 34, 5937–5946.
doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.04.047
Guidotti, G., Brambilla, L., and Rossi, D. (2017). Cell-penetrating peptides: from
basic research to clinics. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 38, 406–424. doi: 10.1016/j.tips.
2017.01.003
Gupta, B., Levchenko, T. S., and Torchilin, V. P. (2005). Intracellular delivery of
large molecules and small particles by cell-penetrating proteins and peptides.
Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 57, 637–651. doi: 10.1016/j.addr.2004.10.007
Habgood, M. D., Bye, N., Dziegielewska, K. M., Ek, C. J., Lane, M. A., Potter, A.,
et al. (2007). Changes in blood-brain barrier permeability to large and small
molecules following traumatic brain injury in mice. Eur. J. Neurosci. 25,
231–238. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2006.05275.x

17

November 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 528

Ng and Lee

Pathophysiology and Therapy of Traumatic Brain Injuries

glutamate-induced apoptosis in rat cerebellar granule cells. J. Biol. Chem. 272,
18518–18521. doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.30.18518
Kelsen, J., Karlsson, M., Hansson, M. J., Yang, Z., Fischer, W., Hugerth, M., et al.
(2019). Copenhagen head injury ciclosporin (CHIC) study: a phase iia safety,
pharmacokinetics and biomarker study of ciclosporin in severe traumatic brain
injury patients. J. Neurotrauma. doi: 10.1089/neu.2018.6369 [Epub ahead of
print].
Khalin, I., Alyautdin, R., Wong, T. W., Gnanou, J., Kocherga, G., and Kreuter, J.
(2016). Brain-derived neurotrophic factor delivered to the brain using
poly (lactide-co-glycolide) nanoparticles improves neurological and cognitive
outcome in mice with traumatic brain injury. Drug Deliv. 23, 3520–3528.
doi: 10.1080/10717544.2016.1199609
Kim, H. J., Lee, J. H., and Kim, S. H. (2009). Therapeutic effects of human
mesenchymal stem cells for traumatic brain injury in rats: secretion of
neurotrophic factors and inhibition of apoptosis. J. Neurotrauma 27, 131–138.
doi: 10.1089/neu.2008-0818
Kim, D. K., Nishida, H., An, S. Y., Shetty, A. K., Bartosh, T. J., and Prockop, D. J.
(2016). Chromatographically isolated CD63+CD81+ extracellular vesicles from
mesenchymal stromal cells rescue cognitive impairments after TBI. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U S A 113, 170–175. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1522297113
Kleindienst, A., Harvey, H. B., Rice, A. C., Müller, C., Hamm, R. J.,
Gaab, M. R., et al. (2004). Intraventricular infusion of the neurotrophic protein
S100B improves cognitive recovery after fluid percussion injury in the rat.
J. Neurotrauma 21, 541–547. doi: 10.1089/089771504774129874
Knoblach, S. M., Alroy, D. A., Nikolaeva, M., Cernak, I., Stoica, B. A., and
Faden, A. I. (2004). Caspase inhibitor z-DEVD-fmk attenuates calpain and
necrotic cell death in vitro and after traumatic brain injury. J. Cereb. Blood Flow
Metab. 24, 1119–1132. doi: 10.1097/01.WCB.0000138664.17682.32
Koren, E., and Torchilin, V. P. (2012). Cell-penetrating peptides: breaking through
to the other side. Trends Mol. Med. 18, 385–393. doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2012.
04.012
Kossmann, T., Stahel, P. F., Lenzlinger, P. M., Redl, H., Dubs, R. W.,
Trentz, O., et al. (1997). Interleukin-8 released into the cerebrospinal fluid
after brain injury is associated with blood-brain barrier dysfunction and
nerve growth factor production. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 17, 280–289.
doi: 10.1097/00004647-199703000-00005
Kovesdi, E., Kamnaksh, A., Wingo, D., Ahmed, F., Grunberg, N. E., Long, J. B.,
et al. (2012). Acute minocycline treatment mitigates the symptoms of mild
blast-induced traumatic brain injury. Front. Neurol. 3:111. doi: 10.3389/fneur.
2012.00111
Kromer, L. F. (1987). Nerve growth factor treatment after brain injury prevents
neuronal death. Science 235, 214–216. doi: 10.1126/science.3798108
Kucher, K., Johns, D., Maier, D., Abel, R., Badke, A., Baron, H., et al. (2018).
First-in-man intrathecal application of neurite growth-promoting anti-nogo-A
antibodies in acute spinal cord injury. Neurorehabil. Neural Repair 32, 578–589.
doi: 10.1177/1545968318776371
Kulbe, J. R., Singh, I. N., Wang, J. A., Cebak, J. E., and Hall, E. D. (2018).
Continuous infusion of phenelzine, cyclosporine A, or their combination:
evaluation of mitochondrial bioenergetics, oxidative damage and cytoskeletal
degradation following severe controlled cortical impact traumatic brain injury
in rats. J. Neurotrauma 35, 1280–1293. doi: 10.1089/neu.2017.5353
Lampe, K. J., Kern, D. S., Mahoney, M. J., and Bjugstad, K. B. (2011). The
administration of BDNF and GDNF to the brain via PLGA microparticles
patterned within a degradable PEG-based hydrogel: protein distribution and
the glial response. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. A 96A, 595–607. doi: 10.1002/jbm.a.
33011
Laskowski, A., Schmidt, W., Dinkel, K., Martínez-Sánchez, M., and
Reymann, K. G. (2005). bFGF and EGF modulate trauma-induced proliferation
and neurogenesis in juvenile organotypic hippocampal slice cultures. Brain
Res. 1037, 78–89. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2004.12.035
Lee, L. L., Galo, E., Lyeth, B. G., Muizelaar, J. P., and Berman, R. F. (2004).
Neuroprotection in the rat lateral fluid percussion model of traumatic brain
injury by SNX-185, an N-type voltage-gated calcium channel blocker. Exp.
Neurol. 190, 70–78. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2004.07.003
Li, D., Huang, S., Zhu, J., Hu, T., Han, Z., Zhang, S., et al. (2019). Exosomes from
MiR-21–5p-increased neurons play a role in neuroprotection by suppressing
rab11a-mediated neuronal autophagy in vitro after traumatic brain injury. Med.
Sci. Monit. 25, 1871–1885. doi: 10.12659/MSM.915727

Hall, E. D. (1992). The neuroprotective pharmacology of methylprednisolone.
J. Neurosurg. 76, 13–22. doi: 10.3171/jns.1992.76.1.0013
Hall, E. D., Detloff, M. R., Johnson, K., and Kupina, N. C. (2004).
Peroxynitrite-mediated protein nitration and lipid peroxidation in a
mouse model of traumatic brain injury. J. Neurotrauma 21, 9–20.
doi: 10.1089/089771504772695904
Hardingham, G. E. (2009). Coupling of the NMDA receptor to neuroprotective
and neurodestructive events. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 37, 1147–1160.
doi: 10.1042/bst0371147
Hardingham, G. E., Fukunaga, Y., and Bading, H. (2002). Extrasynaptic NMDARs
oppose synaptic NMDARs by triggering CREB shut-off and cell death
pathways. Nat. Neurosci. 5, 405–414. doi: 10.1038/nn835
Heile, A., and Brinker, T. (2011). Clinical translation of stem cell therapy
in traumatic brain injury: the potential of encapsulated mesenchymal cell
biodelivery of glucagon-like peptide-1. Dialogues Clin. Neurosci. 13, 279–286.
Hellewell, S. C., Yan, E. B., Agyapomaa, D. A., Bye, N., and MorgantiKossmann, M. C. (2010). Post-traumatic hypoxia exacerbates brain tissue
damage: analysis of axonal injury and glial responses. J. Neurotrauma 27,
1997–2010. doi: 10.1089/neu.2009.1245
Höltje, M., Djalali, S., Hofmann, F., Münster-Wandowski, A., Hendrix, S.,
Boato, F., et al. (2009). A 29-amino acid fragment of clostridium botulinum
C3 protein enhances neuronal outgrowth, connectivity and reinnervation.
FASEB J. 23, 1115–1126. doi: 10.1096/fj.08-116855
Homsi, S., Federico, F., Croci, N., Palmier, B., Plotkine, M., MarchandLeroux, C., et al. (2009). Minocycline effects on cerebral edema: relations with
inflammatory and oxidative stress markers following traumatic brain injury in
mice. Brain Res. 1291, 122–132. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.07.031
Hong, S. J., Dawson, T. M., and Dawson, V. L. (2004). Nuclear and mitochondrial
conversations in cell death: PARP-1 and AIF signaling. Trends Pharmacol. Sci.
25, 259–264. doi: 10.1016/j.tips.2004.03.005
Houchin, M. L., Neuenswander, S. A., and Topp, E. M. (2007). Effect of excipients
on PLGA film degradation and the stability of an incorporated peptide.
J. Control. Release 117, 413–420. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2006.11.023
Houchin, M. L., and Topp, E. M. (2008). Chemical degradation of peptides and
proteins in PLGA: a review of reactions and mechanisms. J. Pharm. Sci. 97,
2395–2404. doi: 10.1002/jps.21176
Huelsenbeck, S., Rohrbeck, A., Handreck, A., Hellmich, G., Kiaei, E., Roettinger, I.,
et al. (2012). C3 peptide promotes axonal regeneration and functional
motor recovery after peripheral nerve injury. Neurotherapeutics 9, 185–198.
doi: 10.1007/s13311-011-0072-y
Imer, M., Omay, B., Uzunkol, A., Erdem, T., Sabanci, P. A., Karasu, A., et al. (2009).
Effect of magnesium, MK-801 and combination of magnesium and MK-801
on blood brain barrier permeability and brain edema after experimental
traumatic diffuse brain injury. Neurol. Res. 31, 977–981. doi: 10.1179/17431320
9X385617
Jain, K. K. (2008). Neuroprotection in traumatic brain injury. Drug Discov. Today
13, 1082–1089. doi: 10.1016/j.drudis.2008.09.006
Jain, R. A. (2000). The manufacturing techniques of various drug loaded
biodegradable poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA) devices. Biomaterials 21,
2475–2490. doi: 10.1016/s0142-9612(00)00115-0
Jeong, J. O., Han, J. W., Kim, J. M., Cho, H. J., Park, C., Lee, N., et al. (2011).
Malignant tumor formation after transplantation of short-term cultured bone
marrow mesenchymal stem cells in experimental myocardial infarction and
diabetic neuropathy. Circ. Res. 108, 1340–1347. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.
110.239848
Jin, K., Mao, X. O., and Greenberg, D. A. (2006). Vascular endothelial growth
factor stimulates neurite outgrowth from cerebral cortical neurons via Rho
kinase signaling. J. Neurobiol. 66, 236–242. doi: 10.1002/neu.20215
Johnson, V. E., Stewart, J. E., Begbie, F. D., Trojanowski, J. Q., Smith, D. H.,
and Stewart, W. (2013). Inflammation and white matter degeneration
persist for years after a single traumatic brain injury. Brain 136, 28–42.
doi: 10.1093/brain/aws322
Kawamura, M., Nakajima, W., Ishida, A., Ohmura, A., Miura, S., and Takada, G.
(2005). Calpain inhibitor MDL 28170 protects hypoxic-ischemic brain injury
in neonatal rats by inhibition of both apoptosis and necrosis. Brain Res. 1037,
59–69. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2004.12.050
Kawasaki, H., Morooka, T., Shimohama, S., Kimura, J., Hirano, T., Gotoh, Y., et al.
(1997). Activation and involvement of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase in

Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

18

November 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 528

Ng and Lee

Pathophysiology and Therapy of Traumatic Brain Injuries

Li, W. J., Laurencin, C. T., Caterson, E. J., Tuan, R. S., and Ko, F. K. (2002).
Electrospun nanofibrous structure: a novel scaffold for tissue engineering.
J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 60, 613–621. doi: 10.1002/jbm.10167
Liao, Z. B., Jiang, G. Y., Tang, Z. H., Zhi, X. G., Sun, X. C., Tang, W. Y., et al.
(2009). Erythropoietin can promote survival of cerebral cells by downregulating
Bax gene after traumatic brain injury in rats. Neurol. India 57, 722–728.
doi: 10.4103/0028-3886.59466
Liao, Z. B., Zhi, X. G., Shi, Q. H., and He, Z. H. (2008). Recombinant human
erythropoietin administration protects cortical neurons from traumatic brain
injury in rats. Eur. J. Neurol. 15, 140–149. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2007.
02013.x
Lifshitz, J., Sullivan, P. G., Hovda, D. A., Wieloch, T., and McIntosh, T. K.
(2004). Mitochondrial damage and dysfunction in traumatic brain injury.
Mitochondrion 4, 705–713. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2004.07.021
Ligade, P. C., Jadhav, K. R., and Kadam, V. J. (2010). Brain drug delivery
system: an overview. Curr. Drug Ther. 5, 105–110. doi: 10.2174/157488510791
065085
Lin, R., Kwok, J. C., Crespo, D., and Fawcett, J. W. (2008). Chondroitinase ABC
has a long-lasting effect on chondroitin sulphate glycosaminoglycan content
in the injured rat brain. J. Neurochem. 104, 400–408. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.
2007.05066.x
Lindgren, M., Hällbrink, M., Prochiantz, A., and Langel, U. (2000). Cellpenetrating peptides. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 21, 99–103. doi: 10.1016/s01656147(00)01447-4
Ling, G. S., and Ecklund, J. M. (2011). Traumatic brain injury in modern war. Curr.
Opin. Anaesthesiol. 24, 124–130. doi: 10.1097/ACO.0b013e32834458da
Liu, Y., Wong, T. P., Aarts, M., Rooyakkers, A., Liu, L., Lai, T. W., et al. (2007).
NMDA receptor subunits have differential roles in mediating excitotoxic
neuronal death both in vitro and in vivo. J. Neurosci. 27, 2846–2857.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0116-07.2007
Lord-Fontaine, S., Yang, F., Diep, Q., Dergham, P., Munzer, S., Tremblay, P.,
et al. (2008). Local inhibition of Rho signaling by cell-permeable recombinant
protein BA-210 prevents secondary damage and promotes functional
recovery following acute spinal cord injury. J. Neurotrauma 25, 1309–1322.
doi: 10.1089/neu.2008.0613
Lotocki, G., de Rivero Vaccari, J. P., Perez, E. R., Sanchez-Molano, J., FuronesAlonso, O., Bramlett, H. M., et al. (2009). Alterations in blood-brain barrier
permeability to large and small molecules and leukocyte accumulation after
traumatic brain injury: effects of post-traumatic hypothermia. J. Neurotrauma
26, 1123–1134. doi: 10.1089/neu.2008.0802
Lu, K. T., Cheng, N. C., Wu, C. Y., and Yang, Y. L. (2008). NKCC1mediated traumatic brain injury-induced brain edema and neuron death via
Raf/MEK/MAPK cascade. Crit. Care Med. 36, 917–922. doi: 10.1097/CCM.
0B013E31816590C4
Lu, D., Mahmood, A., Qu, C., Goussev, A., Schallert, T., and Chopp, M. (2005).
Erythropoietin enhances neurogenesis and restores spatial memory in rats after
traumatic brain injury. J. Neurotrauma 22, 1011–1017. doi: 10.1089/neu.2005.
22.1011
Lu, D., Mahmood, A., Wang, L., Li, Y., Lu, M., and Chopp, M. (2001). Adult bone
marrow stromal cells administered intravenously to rats after traumatic brain
injury migrate into brain and improve neurological outcome. Neuroreport 12,
559–563. doi: 10.1097/00001756-200103050-00025
Lu, K. T., Sun, C. L., Wo, P. Y., Yen, H. H., Tang, T. H., Ng, M. C., et al.
(2011). Hippocampal neurogenesis after traumatic brain injury is mediated by
vascular endothelial growth factor receptor-2 and the Raf/MEK/ERK cascade.
J. Neurotrauma 28, 441–450. doi: 10.1089/neu.2010.1473
Luo, P., Fei, F., Zhang, L., Qu, Y., and Fei, Z. (2011). The role of glutamate
receptors in traumatic brain injury: implications for postsynaptic density in
pathophysiology. Brain Res. Bull. 85, 313–320. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2011.
05.004
Maas, A. I. R., Menon, D. K., Adelson, P. D., Andelic, N., Bell, M. J., Belli, A., et al.
(2017). Traumatic brain injury: integrated approaches to improve prevention,
clinical care, and research. Lancet Neurol. 16, 987–1048. doi: 10.1016/S14744422(17)30371-X
Maas, A. I., Murray, G., Henney, H. III., Kassem, N., Legrand, V., Mangelus, M.,
et al. (2006). Efficacy and safety of dexanabinol in severe traumatic brain injury:
results of a phase III randomised, placebo-controlled, clinical trial. Lancet
Neurol. 5, 38–45. doi: 10.1016/s1474-4422(05)70253-2

Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

Maas, A., Roozenbeek, B., and Manley, G. (2010). Clinical trials in traumatic
brain injury: past experience and current developments. Neurotherapeutics 7,
115–126. doi: 10.1016/j.nurt.2009.10.022
Mahmood, A., Lu, D., and Chopp, M. (2004a). Intravenous administration of
marrow stromal cells (MSCs) increases the expression of growth factors
in rat brain after traumatic brain injury. J. Neurotrauma 21, 33–39.
doi: 10.1089/089771504772695922
Mahmood, A., Lu, D., and Chopp, M. (2004b). Marrow stromal cell
transplantation after traumatic brain injury promotes cellular proliferation
within the brain. Neurosurgery 55, 1185–1193. doi: 10.1227/01.neu.
0000141042.14476.3c
Maiuri, M. C., Zalckvar, E., Kimchi, A., and Kroemer, G. (2007). Self-eating and
self-killing: crosstalk between autophagy and apoptosis. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.
8, 741–752. doi: 10.1038/nrm2239
Mammis, A., McIntosh, T. K., and Maniker, A. H. (2009). Erythropoietin as
a neuroprotective agent in traumatic brain injury review. Surg. Neurol. 71,
527–531. doi: 10.1016/j.surneu.2008.02.040
Mazzeo, A. T., Brophy, G. M., Gilman, C. B., Alves, Ó. L., Robles, J. R., Hayes, R. L.,
et al. (2009). Safety and tolerability of cyclosporin a in severe traumatic brain
injury patients: results from a prospective randomized trial. J. Neurotrauma 26,
2195–2206. doi: 10.1089/neu.2009.1012
Mbye, L. H., Singh, I. N., Carrico, K. M., Saatman, K. E., and Hall, E. D.
(2008). Comparative neuroprotective effects of cyclosporin A and NIM811,
a nonimmunosuppressive cyclosporin A analog, following traumatic brain
injury. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 29, 87–97. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2008.93
McKerracher, L., and Anderson, K. D. (2013). Analysis of recruitment and
outcomes in the phase I/IIa Cethrin clinical trial for acute spinal cord injury.
J. Neurotrauma 30, 1795–1804. doi: 10.1089/neu.2013.2909
McKerracher, L., and Guertin, P. (2013). Rho as a target to promote repair:
translation to clinical studies with cethrin. Curr. Pharm. Des. 19, 4400–4410.
doi: 10.2174/1381612811319240007
Meldrum, B. S. (2000). Glutamate as a neurotransmitter in the brain: review of
physiology and pathology. J. Nutr. 130, 1007S–1015S. doi: 10.1093/jn/130.4.
1007s
Mi, S., Lee, X., Shao, Z., Thill, G., Ji, B., Relton, J., et al. (2004). LINGO-1 is a
component of the Nogo-66 receptor/p75 signaling complex. Nat. Neurosci. 7,
221–228. doi: 10.1038/nn1188
Mizushima, N. (2007). Autophagy: process and function. Genes Dev. 21,
2861–2873. doi: 10.1101/gad.1599207
Mizushima, N., Levine, B., Cuervo, A. M., and Klionsky, D. J. (2008). Autophagy
fights disease through cellular self-digestion. Nature 451, 1069–1075.
doi: 10.1038/nature06639
Monnier, P. P., Sierra, A., Schwab, J. M., Henke-Fahle, S., and Mueller, B. K.
(2003). The Rho/ROCK pathway mediates neurite growth-inhibitory
activity associated with the chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans of the CNS
glial scar. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 22, 319–330. doi: 10.1016/s1044-7431(02)
00035-0
Morganti-Kossmann, M. C., Rancan, M., Stahel, P. F., and Kossmann, T.
(2002). Inflammatory response in acute traumatic brain injury: a double-edged
sword. Cur. Opin. Crit. Care 8, 101–105. doi: 10.1097/00075198-20020400000002
Morganti-Kossmann, M. C., Satgunaseelan, L., Bye, N., and Kossmann, T. (2007).
Modulation of immune response by head injury. Injury 38, 1392–1400.
doi: 10.1016/j.injury.2007.10.005
Mori, T., Wang, X., Jung, J. C., Sumii, T., Singhal, A. B., Fini, M. E., et al.
(2002). Mitogen-activated protein kinase inhibition in traumatic brain injury:
in vitro and in vivo effects. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 22, 444–452.
doi: 10.1097/00004647-200204000-00008
Na, D. H., and DeLuca, P. P. (2005). PEGylation of octreotide: I. Separation
of positional isomers and stability against acylation by poly(D,Llactide-co-glycolide). Pharm. Res. 22, 736–742. doi: 10.1007/s11095-0052589-4
Nadler, V., Biegon, A., Beit-Yannai, E., Adamchik, J., and Shohami, E. (1995).
45Ca accumulation in rat brain after closed head injury; attenuation by the
novel neuroprotective agent HU-211. Brain Res. 685, 1–11. doi: 10.1016/00068993(95)00367-y
Nadler, V., Mechoulam, R., and Sokolovsky, M. (1993). The nonpsychotropic cannabinoid (+)-(3S,4S)-7-hydroxy-∆6 -tetrahydrocannabinol

19

November 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 528

Ng and Lee

Pathophysiology and Therapy of Traumatic Brain Injuries

amyloid precursor proteins and β-amyloid peptide after experimental brain
injury in the rat. J. Neurosci. 16, 1083–1090. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.16-0301083.1996
Popovic, N., and Brundin, P. (2006). Therapeutic potential of controlled drug
delivery systems in neurodegenerative diseases. Int. J. Pharm. 314, 120–126.
doi: 10.1016/j.ijpharm.2005.09.040
Povlishock, J. (1992). Traumatically induced axonal injury: pathogenesis and
pathobiological implications. Brain Pathol. 2, 1–12.
Praticò, D., Reiss, P., Tang, L. X., Sung, S., Rokach, J., and McIntosh, T. K. (2002).
Local and systemic increase in lipid peroxidation after moderate experimental
traumatic brain injury. J. Neurochem. 80, 894–898. doi: 10.1046/j.0022-3042.
2002.00777.x
Raghupathi, R. (2004). Cell death mechanisms following traumatic brain injury.
Brain Pathol. 14, 215–222. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2004.tb00056.x
Raghupathi, R., Strauss, K., Zhang, C., Krajewski, S., Reed, J., and
McIntosh, T. (2003). Temporal alterations in cellular Bax:Bcl-2 ratio
following traumatic brain injury in the rat. J. Neurotrauma 20, 421–435.
doi: 10.1089/089771503765355504
Rancan, M., Otto, V. I., Hans, V. H., Gerlach, I., Jork, R., Trentz, O.,
et al. (2001). Upregulation of ICAM-1 and MCP-1 but not of MIP-2 and
sensorimotor deficit in response to traumatic axonal injury in rats. J. Neurosci.
Res. 63, 438–446. doi: 10.1002/1097-4547(20010301)63:5<438::aid-jnr1039>3.
3.co;2-g
Rao, V. L., Bas, kaya, M. K., Doğan, A., Rothstein, J. D., and Dempsey, R. J. (1998).
Traumatic brain injury down-regulates glial glutamate transporter (GLT-1 and
GLAST) proteins in rat brain. J. Neurochem. 70, 2020–2027. doi: 10.1046/j.
1471-4159.1998.70052020.x
Ray, S. K., Dixon, C. E., and Banik, N. L. (2002). Molecular mechanisms in the
pathogenesis of traumatic brain injury. Histol. Histopathol. 17, 1137–1152.
doi: 10.14670/HH-17.1137
Reynolds, I. J., and Hastings, T. G. (1995). Glutamate induces the production
of reactive oxygen species in cultured forebrain neurons following NMDA
receptor activation. J. Neurosci. 15, 3318–3327. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1505-03318.1995
Riess, P., Zhang, C., Saatman, K. E., Laurer, H. L., Longhi, L. G., Raghupathi, R.,
et al. (2002). Transplanted neural stem cells survive, differentiate, and
improve neurological motor function after experimental traumatic brain
injury. Neurosurgery 51, 1043–1054. doi: 10.1097/00006123-200210000-00035
Risdall, J. E., and Menon, D. K. (2011). Traumatic brain injury. Philos. Trans. R.
Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 366, 241–250. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2010.0230
Saatman, K. E., Abai, B., Grosvenor, A., Vorwerk, C. K., Smith, D. H., and
Meaney, D. F. (2003). Traumatic axonal injury results in biphasic calpain
activation and retrograde transport impairment in mice. J. Cereb. Blood Flow
Metab. 23, 34–42. doi: 10.1097/01.WCB.0000035040.10031.B0
Saatman, K. E., Duhaime, A. C., Bullock, R., Maas, A. I., Valadka, A., and
Manley, G. T. (2008). Classification of traumatic brain injury for targeted
therapies. J. Neurotrauma 25, 719–738. doi: 10.1089/neu.2008.0586
Sakai, K., Fukuda, T., and Iwadate, K. (2014). Immunohistochemical analysis
of the ubiquitin proteasome system and autophagy lysosome system induced
after traumatic intracranial injury: association with time between the injury
and death. Am. J. Forensic Med. Pathol. 35, 38–44. doi: 10.1097/paf.
0000000000000067
Samii, A., Badie, H., Fu, K., Luther, R. R., and Hovda, D. A. (1999). Effects of
an N-type calcium channel antagonist (SNX 111; Ziconotide) on calcium-45
accumulation following fluid-percussion injury. J. Neurotrauma 16, 879–892.
doi: 10.1089/neu.1999.16.879
Sanchez Mejia, R. O., Ona, V. O., Li, M., and Friedlander, R. M. (2001).
Minocycline reduces traumatic brain injury-mediated caspase-1 activation,
tissue damage and neurological dysfunction. Neurosurgery 48, 1393–1401.
doi: 10.1097/00006123-200106000-00051
Sanchez-Ramos, J., Song, S., Cardozo-Pelaez, F., Hazzi, C., Stedeford, T.,
Willing, A., et al. (2000). Adult bone marrow stromal cells differentiate
into neural cells in vitro. Exp. Neurol. 164, 247–256. doi: 10.1006/exnr.
2000.7389
Saraiva, C., Praca, C., Ferreira, R., Santos, T., Ferreira, L., and Bernardino, L.
(2016). Nanoparticle-mediated brain drug delivery: overcoming blood-brain
barrier to treat neurodegenerative diseases. J. Control. Release 235, 34–47.
doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2016.05.044

1,1-dimethylheptyl (HU-211) attenuates N-methyl-d-aspartate receptormediated neurotoxicity in primary cultures of rat forebrain. Neurosci. Lett.
162, 43–45. doi: 10.1016/0304-3940(93)90555-y
Naga, K. K., Sullivan, P. G., and Geddes, J. W. (2007). High cyclophilin D content
of synaptic mitochondria results in increased vulnerability to permeability
transition. J. Neurosci. 27, 7469–7475. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0646-07.2007
Nagamoto-Combs, K., McNeal, D. W., Morecraft, R. J., and Combs, C. K.
(2007). Prolonged microgliosis in the rhesus monkey central nervous system
after traumatic brain injury. J. Neurotrauma 24, 1719–1742. doi: 10.1089/neu.
2007.0377
Namiki, J., Kojima, A., and Tator, C. H. (2000). Effect of brain-derived
neurotrophic factor, nerve growth factor, and neurotrophin-3 on functional
recovery and regeneration after spinal cord injury in adult rats. J. Neurotrauma
17, 1219–1231. doi: 10.1089/neu.2000.17.1219
Nash, M., Pribiag, H., Fournier, A., and Jacobson, C. (2009). Central nervous
system regeneration inhibitors and their intracellular substrates. Mol.
Neurobiol. 40, 224–235. doi: 10.1007/s12035-009-8083-y
Newcomb, R., Abbruscato, T. J., Singh, T., Nadasdi, L., Davis, T. P., and
Miljanich, G. (2000). Bioavailability of Ziconotide in brain: influx from
blood, stability and diffusion. Peptides 21, 491–501. doi: 10.1016/s01969781(00)00175-3
Ng, S. Y., Semple, B. D., Morganti-Kossmann, M. C., and Bye, N. (2012).
Attenuation of microglial activation with minocycline is not associated with
changes in neurogenesis after focal traumatic brain injury in adult mice.
J. Neurotrauma 29, 1410–1425. doi: 10.1089/neu.2011.2188
Nichol, A., French, C., Little, L., Haddad, S., Presneill, J., Arabi, Y., et al.
(2015). Erythropoietin in traumatic brain injury (EPO-TBI): a double-blind
randomised controlled trial. Lancet 386, 2499–2506. doi: 10.1016/s01406736(15)00386-4
Okiyama, K., Rosenkrantz, T., Smith, D., Gennarelli, T., and McIntosh, T.
(1994). (S)-emopamil attenuates acute reduction in regional cerebral blood
flow following experimental brain injury. J. Neurotrauma 11, 83–95.
doi: 10.1089/neu.1994.11.83
Okiyama, K., Smith, D. H., Thomas, M. J., and McIntosh, T. K. (1992). Evaluation
of a novel calcium channel blocker, (S)-emopamil, on regional cerebral edema
and neurobehavioral function after experimental brain injury. J. Neurosurg. 77,
607–615. doi: 10.3171/jns.1992.77.4.0607
Okonkwo, D. O., Büki, A., Siman, R., and Povlishock, J. T. (1999). Cyclosporin
A limits calcium-induced axonal damage following traumatic brain injury.
Neuroreport 10, 353–358. doi: 10.1097/00001756-199902050-00026
Okonkwo, D. O., and Povlishock, J. T. (1999). An intrathecal bolus of cyclosporin
A before injury preserves mitochondrial integrity and attenuates axonal
disruption in traumatic brain injury. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 19, 443–451.
doi: 10.1097/00004647-199904000-00010
Orive, G., Anitua, E., Pedraz, J. L., and Emerich, D. F. (2009). Biomaterials for
promoting brain protection, repair and regeneration. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10,
682–692. doi: 10.1038/nrn2685
Parachikova, A., Vasilevko, V., Cribbs, D. H., LaFerla, F. M., and Green, K. N.
(2010). Reductions in amyloid-β-derived neuroinflammation, with
minocycline, restore cognition but do not significantly affect tau
hyperphosphorylation. J. Alzheimers Dis. 21, 527–542. doi: 10.3233/jad2010-100204
Park, T. G. (1995). Degradation of poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) microspheres:
effect of copolymer composition. Biomaterials 16, 1123–1130.
doi: 10.1016/0142-9612(95)93575-x
Park, J. B., Yiu, G., Kaneko, S., Wang, J., Chang, J., and He, Z. (2005). A
TNF receptor family member, TROY, is a coreceptor with Nogo receptor in
mediating the inhibitory activity of myelin inhibitors. Neuron 45, 345–351.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2004.12.040
Pasterkamp, R. J., Anderson, P. N., and Verhaagen, J. (2001). Peripheral nerve
injury fails to induce growth of lesioned ascending dorsal column axons into
spinal cord scar tissue expressing the axon repellent Semaphorin3A. Eur.
J. Neurosci. 13, 457–471. doi: 10.1046/j.0953-816x.2000.01398.x
Pasterkamp, R. J., and Kolodkin, A. L. (2003). Semaphorin junction: making
tracks toward neural connectivity. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 13, 79–89.
doi: 10.1016/s0959-4388(03)00003-5
Pierce, J., Trojanowski, J., Graham, D., Smith, D., and McIntosh, T. (1996).
Immunohistochemical characterization of alterations in the distribution of

Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

20

November 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 528

Ng and Lee

Pathophysiology and Therapy of Traumatic Brain Injuries

Sarkar, C., Zhao, Z., Aungst, S., Sabirzhanov, B., Faden, A. I., and Lipinski, M. M.
(2014). Impaired autophagy flux is associated with neuronal cell death after
traumatic brain injury. Autophagy 10, 2208–2222. doi: 10.4161/15548627.2014.
981787
Sattler, R., Xiong, Z., Lu, W.-Y., Hafner, M., Macdonald, J. F., and Tymianski, M.
(1999). Specific coupling of NMDA receptor activation to nitric oxide
neurotoxicity by PSD-95 protein. Science 284, 1845–1848. doi: 10.1126/science.
284.5421.1845
Schäbitz, W.-R., Schwab, S., Spranger, M., and Hacke, W. (1997). Intraventricular
brain-derived neurotrophic factor reduces infarct size after focal
cerebral ischemia in rats. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 17, 500–506.
doi: 10.1097/00004647-199705000-00003
Scheff, S. W., and Sullivan, P. G. (1999). Cyclosporin A significantly ameliorates
cortical damage following experimental traumatic brain injury in rodents.
J. Neurotrauma 16, 783–792. doi: 10.1089/neu.1999.16.783
Schenk, U., Menna, E., Kim, T., Passafaro, M., Chang, S., De Camilli, P., et al.
(2005). A novel pathway for presynaptic mitogen-activated kinase activation
via AMPA receptors. J. Neurosci. 25, 1654–1663. doi: 10.1523/jneurosci.307404.2005
Schmidt, O. I., Infanger, M., Heyde, C. E., Ertel, W., and Stahel, P. F. (2004).
The role of neuroinflammation in traumatic brain injury. Eur. J. Trauma 30,
135–149. doi: 10.1007/s00068-004-1394-9
Schneider, A., and Simons, M. (2013). Exosomes: vesicular carriers for intercellular
communication in neurodegenerative disorders. Cell Tissue Res. 352, 33–47.
doi: 10.1007/s00441-012-1428-2
Sebbage, V. (2009). Cell-penetrating peptides and their therapeutic applications.
Biosci. Horiz. 2, 64–72. doi: 10.1093/biohorizons/hzp001
Semple, B. D., Bye, N., Rancan, M., Ziebell, J. M., and Morganti-Kossmann, M. C.
(2010). Role of CCL2 (MCP-1) in traumatic brain injury (TBI): evidence from
severe TBI patients and CCL2-/- mice. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 30, 769–782.
doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.2009.262
Shahlaie, K., Lyeth, B. G., Gurkoff, G. G., Muizelaar, J. P., and Berman, R. F. (2009).
Neuroprotective effects of selective N-type VGCC blockade on stretch-injuryinduced calcium dynamics in cortical neurons. J. Neurotrauma 27, 175–187.
doi: 10.1089/neu.2009.1003
Shohami, E., Gallily, R., Mechoulam, R., Bass, R., and Ben-Hur, T.
(1997). Cytokine production in the brain following closed head injury:
dexanabinol (HU-211) is a novel TNF-α inhibitor and an effective
neuroprotectant. J. Neuroimmunol. 72, 169–177. doi: 10.1016/s0165-5728(96)
00181-6
Shohami, E., and Kohen, R. (2011). ‘‘The role of reactive oxygen species in the
pathogenesis of traumatic brain injury,’’ in Oxidative Stress and Free Radical
Damage in Neurology, eds N. Gadoth, and H. H. Göbel (Humana Press),
99–118.
Shohami, E., Novikov, M., and Bass, R. (1995). Long-term effect of HU-211, a
novel non-competitive NMDA antagonist, on motor and memory functions
after closed head injury in the rat. Brain Res. 674, 55–62. doi: 10.1016/00068993(94)01433-i
Simeoli, R., Montague, K., Jones, H. R., Castaldi, L., Chambers, D., Kelleher, J. H.,
et al. (2017). Exosomal cargo including microRNA regulates sensory neuron
to macrophage communication after nerve trauma. Nat. Commun. 8:1778.
doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-01841-5
Singh, I. N., Sullivan, P. G., Deng, Y., Mbye, L. H., and Hall, E. D. (2006). Time
course of post-traumatic mitochondrial oxidative damage and dysfunction in a
mouse model of focal traumatic brain injury: implications for neuroprotective
therapy. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 26, 1407–1418. doi: 10.1038/sj.jcbfm.
9600297
Sinson, G., Perri, B. R., Trojanowski, J. Q., Flamm, E. S., and Mcintosh, T. K.
(1997). Improvement of cognitive deficits and decreased cholinergic
neuronal cell loss and apoptotic cell death following neurotrophin infusion
after experimental traumatic brain injury. J. Neurosurg. 86, 511–518.
doi: 10.3171/jns.1997.86.3.0511
Siopi, E., Cho, A., Homsi, S., Croci, N., Plotkine, M., Marchand-Leroux, C.,
et al. (2011). Minocycline restores sAPPα levels and reduces the late
histopathological consequences of traumatic brain injury in mice.
J. Neurotrauma 28, 2135–2143. doi: 10.1089/neu.2010.1738
Skandsen, T., Kvistad, K. A., Solheim, O., Strand, I. H., Folvik, M., and
Vik, A. (2010). Prevalence and impact of diffuse axonal injury in patients

Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

with moderate and severe head injury: a cohort study of early magnetic
resonance imaging findings and 1-year outcome. J. Neurosurg. 113, 556–563.
doi: 10.3171/2009.9.JNS09626
Skardelly, M., Gaber, K., Burdack, S., Scheidt, F., Hilbig, H., Boltze, J., et al. (2011).
Long-term benefit of human fetal neuronal progenitor cell transplantation in
a clinically adapted model after traumatic brain injury. J. Neurotrauma 28,
401–414. doi: 10.1089/neu.2010.1526
Smith, D. H., Chen, X. H., Pierce, J. E., Wolf, J. A., Trojanowski, J. Q.,
Graham, D. I., et al. (1997). Progressive atrophy and neuron death for
one year following brain trauma in the rat. J. Neurotrauma 14, 715–727.
doi: 10.1089/neu.1997.14.715
Smith, D. H., Meaney, D. F., and Shull, W. H. (2003). Diffuse axonal injury in
head trauma. J. Head Trauma Rehabil. 18, 307–316. doi: 10.1097/00001199200307000-00003
Soppimath, K. S., Aminabhavi, T. M., Kulkarni, A. R., and Rudzinski, W. E. (2001).
Biodegradable polymeric nanoparticles as drug delivery devices. J. Control.
Release 70, 1–20. doi: 10.1016/s0168-3659(00)00339-4
Stoica, B., and Faden, A. (2010). Cell death mechanisms and modulation in
traumatic brain injury. Neurotherapeutics 7, 3–12. doi: 10.1016/j.nurt.2009.
10.023
Sullivan, P. G., Keller, J. N., Bussen, W. L., and Scheff, S. W. (2002). Cytochrome
c release and caspase activation after traumatic brain injury. Brain Res. 949,
88–96. doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(02)02968-2
Sullivan, P. G., Rabchevsky, A. G., Waldmeier, P. C., and Springer, J. E.
(2005). Mitochondrial permeability transition in CNS trauma: cause or effect
of neuronal cell death? J. Neurosci. Res. 79, 231–239. doi: 10.1002/jnr.
20292
Sullivan, P. G., Sebastian, A. H., and Hall, E. D. (2010). Therapeutic
window analysis of the neuroprotective effects of cyclosporine A after
traumatic brain injury. J. Neurotrauma 28, 311–318. doi: 10.1089/neu.
2010.1646
Sullivan, P. G., Thompson, M. B., and Scheff, S. W. (1999). Cyclosporin A
attenuates acute mitochondrial dysfunction following traumatic brain injury.
Exp. Neurol. 160, 226–234. doi: 10.1006/exnr.1999.7197
Sullivan, P. G., Thompson, M., and Scheff, S. W. (2000). Continuous infusion of
cyclosporin A postinjury significantly ameliorates cortical damage following
traumatic brain injury. Exp. Neurol. 161, 631–637. doi: 10.1006/exnr.
1999.7282
Sun, D., Bullock, M. R., Mcginn, M. J., Zhou, Z., Altememi, N., Hagood, S., et al.
(2009). Basic fibroblast growth factor-enhanced neurogenesis contributes to
cognitive recovery in rats following traumatic brain injury. Exp. Neurol. 216,
56–65. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2008.11.011
Sun, D. A., Deshpande, L. S., Sombati, S., Baranova, A., Wilson, M. S., Hamm, R. J.,
et al. (2008). Traumatic brain injury causes a long-lasting calcium (Ca2+)plateau of elevated intracellular Ca levels and altered Ca2+ homeostatic
mechanisms in hippocampal neurons surviving brain injury. Eur. J. Neurosci.
27, 1659–1672. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2008.06156.x
Susin, S. A., Zamzami, N., and Kroemer, G. (1998). Mitochondria as regulators
of apoptosis: doubt no more. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1366, 151–165.
doi: 10.1016/s0005-2728(98)00110-8
Tan, E. Y., Law, J. W., Wang, C. H., and Lee, A. Y. (2007). Development of a
cell transducible RhoA inhibitor TAT-C3 transferase and its encapsulation in
biocompatible microspheres to promote survival and enhance regeneration of
severed neurons. Pharm. Res. 24, 2297–2308. doi: 10.1007/s11095-007-9454-6
Tang-Schomer, M. D., Patel, A. R., Baas, P. W., and Smith, D. H. (2010).
Mechanical breaking of microtubules in axons during dynamic stretch injury
underlies delayed elasticity, microtubule disassembly and axon degeneration.
FASEB J. 24, 1401–1410. doi: 10.1096/fj.09-142844
Taylor, D. D., and Gercel-Taylor, C. (2013). The origin, function and diagnostic
potential of RNA within extracellular vesicles present in human biological
fluids. Front. Genet. 4:142. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2013.00142
Taylor, D. D., and Gercel-Taylor, C. (2014). Exosome platform for diagnosis and
monitoring of traumatic brain injury. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci.
369:20130503. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2013.0503
Temsamani, J., Scherrmann, J. M., Rees, A. R., and Kaczorek, M. (2000). Brain
drug delivery technologies: novel approaches for transporting therapeutics.
Pharm. Sci. Technol. Today 3, 155–162. doi: 10.1016/s1461-5347(00)
00258-3

21

November 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 528

Ng and Lee

Pathophysiology and Therapy of Traumatic Brain Injuries

Thau-Zuchman, O., Shohami, E., Alexandrovich, A. G., and Leker, R. R. (2010).
Vascular endothelial growth factor increases neurogenesis after traumatic
brain injury. J. Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. 30, 1008–1016. doi: 10.1038/jcbfm.
2009.271
Thompson, H. J., and Bakshi, A. (2005). Methylprednisolone was associated with
an increase in death after head injury. Evid. Based Nurs. 8:51. doi: 10.1136/ebn.
8.2.51
Thompson, S. N., Carrico, K. M., Mustafa, A. G., Bains, M., and Hall, E. D.
(2010). A pharmacological analysis of the neuroprotective efficacy of the brainand cell-permeable calpain inhibitor MDL-28170 in the mouse controlled
cortical impact traumatic brain injury model. J. Neurotrauma 27, 2233–2243.
doi: 10.1089/neu.2010.1474
Tian, C., Wang, X., Wang, X., Wang, L., Wang, X., Wu, S., et al. (2013).
Autologous bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell therapy in the subacute
stage of traumatic brain injury by lumbar puncture. Exp. Clin. Transplant. 11,
176–181. doi: 10.6002/ect.2012.0053
Tikka, T. M., and Koistinaho, J. E. (2001). Minocycline provides neuroprotection
against N-methyl-D-aspartate neurotoxicity by inhibiting microglia.
J. Immunol. 166, 7527–7533. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.166.12.7527
Trams, E. G., Lauter, C. J., Salem, N. Jr., and Heine, U. (1981). Exfoliation of
membrane ecto-enzymes in the form of micro-vesicles. Biochim. Biophys. Acta
645, 63–70. doi: 10.1016/0005-2736(81)90512-5
Tsujimoto, Y., and Shimizu, S. (2007). Role of the mitochondrial
membrane permeability transition in cell death. Apoptosis 12, 835–840.
doi: 10.1007/s10495-006-0525-7
Turkoglu, O. F., Eroglu, H., Gurcan, O., Bodur, E., Sargon, M. F., Öner, L., et al.
(2010). Local administration of chitosan microspheres after traumatic brain
injury in rats: a new challenge for cyclosporine - a delivery. Br. J. Neurosurg.
24, 578–583. doi: 10.3109/02688697.2010.487126
van Landeghem, F. K., Weiss, T., Oehmichen, M., and Von Deimling, A. (2006).
Decreased expression of glutamate transporters in astrocytes after human
traumatic brain injury. J. Neurotrauma 23, 1518–1528. doi: 10.1089/neu.2006.
23.1518
Veng, L. M., Mesches, M. H., and Browning, M. D. (2003). Age-related working
memory impairment is correlated with increases in the L-type calcium
channel protein α1D (Cav1.3) in area CA1 of the hippocampus and both are
ameliorated by chronic nimodipine treatment. Brain Res. Mol. Brain Res. 110,
193–202. doi: 10.1016/s0169-328x(02)00643-5
Verweij, B. H., Muizelaar, J. P., Vinas, F. C., Peterson, P. L., Xiong, Y., and Lee, C. P.
(2000). Improvement in mitochondrial dysfunction as a new surrogate
efficiency measure for preclinical trials: dose—response and time-window
profiles for administration of the calcium channel blocker Ziconotide in
experimental brain injury. J. Neurosurg. 93, 829–834. doi: 10.3171/jns.2000.93.
5.0829
Wang, K. C., Kim, J. A., Sivasankaran, R., Segal, R., and He, Z. (2002). p75 interacts
with the Nogo receptor as a co-receptor for Nogo, MAG and OMgp. Nature
420, 74–78. doi: 10.1038/nature01176
Warden, D. (2006). Military TBI during the Iraq and Afghanistan wars.
J. Head Trauma Rehabil. 21, 398–402. doi: 10.1097/00001199-20060900000004
Weber, J. T. (2012). Altered calcium signaling following traumatic brain injury.
Front. Pharmacol. 3:60. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2012.00060
Wennersten, A., Holmin, S., and Mathiesen, T. (2003). Characterization of Bax
and Bcl-2 in apoptosis after experimental traumatic brain injury in the rat. Acta
Neuropathol. 105, 281–288. doi: 10.1007/s00401-002-0649-y
Winton, M. J., Dubreuil, C. I., Lasko, D., Leclerc, N., and Mckerracher, L. (2002).
Characterization of new cell permeable C3-like proteins that inactivate Rho
and stimulate neurite outgrowth on inhibitory substrates. J. Biol. Chem. 277,
32820–32829. doi: 10.1074/jbc.m201195200
Wu, H., Lu, D., Jiang, H., Xiong, Y., Qu, C., Li, B., et al. (2008). Simvastatinmediated upregulation of VEGF and BDNF, activation of the PI3K/Akt
pathway and increase of neurogenesis are associated with therapeutic
improvement after traumatic brain injury. J. Neurotrauma 25, 130–139.
doi: 10.1089/neu.2007.0369
Xin, H., Katakowski, M., Wang, F., Qian, J. Y., Liu, X. S., Ali, M. M.,
et al. (2017). MicroRNA cluster miR-17–92 cluster in exosomes enhance
neuroplasticity and functional recovery after stroke in rats. Stroke 48, 747–753.
doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.116.015204

Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

Xiong, Y., Gu, Q., Peterson, P. L., Muizelaar, J. P., and Lee, C. P. (1997).
Mitochondrial dysfunction and calcium perturbation induced by traumatic
brain injury. J. Neurotrauma 14, 23–34. doi: 10.1089/neu.1997.14.23
Xiong, Y., Mahmood, A., and Chopp, M. (2017). Emerging potential of exosomes
for treatment of traumatic brain injury. Neural Regen. Res. 12, 19–22.
doi: 10.4103/1673-5374.198966
Xiong, Y., Mahmood, A., Qu, C., Kazmi, H., Zhang, Z. G., Noguchi, C. T.,
et al. (2010). Erythropoietin improves histological and functional outcomes
after traumatic brain injury in mice in the absence of the neural
erythropoietin receptor. J. Neurotrauma 27, 205–215. doi: 10.1089/neu.
2009.1001
Xu, J., Wang, H., Lu, X., Ding, K., Zhang, L., He, J., et al. (2014). Posttraumatic
administration of luteolin protects mice from traumatic brain injury:
implication of autophagy and inflammation. Brain Res. 1582, 237–246.
doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.07.042
Xu, B., Zhang, Y., Du, X. F., Li, J., Zi, H. X., Bu, J. W., et al. (2017). Neurons secrete
miR-132-containing exosomes to regulate brain vascular integrity. Cell Res. 27,
882–897. doi: 10.1038/cr.2017.62
Yagita, Y., Kitagawa, K., Sasaki, T., Terasaki, Y., Todo, K., Omura-Matsuoka, E.,
et al. (2007). Rho-kinase activation in endothelial cells contributes to expansion
of infarction after focal cerebral ischemia. J. Neurosci. Res. 85, 2460–2469.
doi: 10.1002/jnr.21375
Yatsiv, I., Grigoriadis, N., Simeonidou, C., Stahel, P. F., Schmidt, O. I.,
Alexandrovitch, A. G., et al. (2005). Erythropoietin is neuroprotective,
improves functional recovery and reduces neuronal apoptosis and
inflammation in a rodent model of experimental closed head injury. FASEB J.
19, 1701–1703. doi: 10.1096/fj.05-3907fje
Yick, L. W., Cheung, P. T., So, K. F., and Wu, W. (2003). Axonal regeneration
of Clarke’s neurons beyond the spinal cord injury scar after treatment
with chondroitinase ABC. Exp. Neurol. 182, 160–168. doi: 10.1016/s00144886(02)00052-3
Yu, P., Huang, L., Zou, J., Yu, Z., Wang, Y., Wang, X., et al. (2008). Immunization
with recombinant Nogo-66 receptor (NgR) promotes axonal regeneration and
recovery of function after spinal cord injury in rats. Neurobiol. Dis. 32, 535–542.
doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2008.09.012
Yu, P., Huang, L., Zou, J., Zhu, H., Wang, X., Yu, Z., et al. (2007). DNA vaccine
against NgR promotes functional recovery after spinal cord injury in adult rats.
Brain Res. 1147, 66–76. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2007.02.013
Yuan, D., Zhao, Y., Banks, W. A., Bullock, K. M., Haney, M., Batrakova, E.,
et al. (2017). Macrophage exosomes as natural nanocarriers for protein delivery
to inflamed brain. Biomaterials 142, 1–12. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2017.
07.011
Zaloshnja, E., Miller, T., Langlois, J. A., and Selassie, A. W. (2008). Prevalence of
long-term disability from traumatic brain injury in the civilian population of
the United States, 2005. J. Head Trauma Rehabil. 23, 394–400. doi: 10.1097/01.
htr.0000341435.52004.ac
Zhang, Y., Ang, B. T., Xiao, Z. C., Ng, I., and Steiger, H. J. (2009). DNA vaccination
against neurite growth inhibitors to enhance functional recovery following
traumatic brain injury. Acta Neurochir. Suppl. 102, 347–351. doi: 10.1007/9783-211-85578-2_66
Zhang, B., Chen, X., Lin, Y., Tan, T., Yang, Z., Dayao, C., et al. (2011). Impairment
of synaptic plasticity in hippocampus is exacerbated by methylprednisolone in
a rat model of traumatic brain injury. Brain Res. 1382, 165–172. doi: 10.1016/j.
brainres.2011.01.065
Zhang, Y., Chopp, M., Meng, Y., Katakowski, M., Xin, H., Mahmood, A.,
et al. (2015). Effect of exosomes derived from multipluripotent mesenchymal
stromal cells on functional recovery and neurovascular plasticity in rats after
traumatic brain injury. J. Neurosurg. 122, 856–867. doi: 10.3171/2014.11.
jns14770
Zhang, Z., Fauser, U., and Schluesener, H. (2008). Dexamethasone suppresses
infiltration of RhoA+ cells into early lesions of rat traumatic brain injury. Acta
Neuropathol. 115, 335–343. doi: 10.1007/s00401-007-0301-y
Zhang, X., Graham, S. H., Kochanek, P. M., Marion, D. W., Nathaniel, P. D.,
Watkins, S. C., et al. (2003). Caspase-8 expression and proteolysis in human
brain after severe head injury. FASEB J. 17, 1367–1369. doi: 10.1096/fj.021067fje
Zhang, Y. B., Li, S. X., Chen, X. P., Yang, L., Zhang, Y. G., Liu, R., et al. (2008).
Autophagy is activated and might protect neurons from degeneration after

22

November 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 528

Ng and Lee

Pathophysiology and Therapy of Traumatic Brain Injuries

traumatic brain injury. Neurosci. Bull. 24, 143–149. doi: 10.1007/s12264-0081108-0
Zhang, L., Wang, H., Fan, Y., Gao, Y., Li, X., Hu, Z., et al. (2017). Fucoxanthin
provides neuroprotection in models of traumatic brain injury via the
Nrf2-ARE and Nrf2-autophagy pathways. Sci. Rep. 7:46763. doi: 10.1038/srep
46763
Zhang, Y., Winterbottom, J. K., Schachner, M., Lieberman, A. R., and
Anderson, P. N. (1997). Tenascin-C expression and axonal sprouting
following injury to the spinal dorsal columns in the adult rat. J. Neurosci.
Res. 49, 433–450. doi: 10.1002/(sici)1097-4547(19970815)49:4<433::aid-jnr5>
3.3.co;2-9
Zhao, J. B., Zhang, Y., Li, G. Z., Su, X. F., and Hang, C. H. (2011). Activation
of JAK2/STAT pathway in cerebral cortex after experimental traumatic
brain injury of rats. Neurosci. Lett. 498, 147–152. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.
05.001

Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org

Zhu, X., Lee, J., Wong, J., Tan, W. L., Feng, Z., Wang, T., et al. (2007). Prestroke DNA immunization against neurite growth inhibitors is beneficial to
the recovery from focal cerebral ischemia in rats. Neural Regen. Res. 2, 513–518.
doi: 10.1016/s1673-5374(07)60102-9
Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2019 Ng and Lee. This is an open-access article distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution
or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and
the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.

23

November 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 528

